
THE 

CONSTITUTIONAL 

By 

J. N. PANDEY , LL, M. 

Lecturer In Lew, Allahabad University, 


TENTH EDITION 



FOREWORD 


Liberty, equality and fraternity were the watch- words of the French 
Revolution. The concept of social justice permeated the Bolshevik upsurage 
which overwhelmed the old order in Russia. In the Indian Co nstitution a 
successful attempt has been made to brm& about a synthesis between the 
con cepts of ind ividual freedom an d s ocial justice , it is lor this reason that the 
attainment of social, ecohotnic and polmcal justice, along with the liberty and 
equality of its citizens is enshrined in the Preamble as the objectives of the 
Constitution. 

The Constitution of India is an organic document which defines the 
powers and functions of the various organs of the State and their inter se 
relationship. It is modelled on the pattern of a federal structure with a strong 
bias in favour of the Centre. It provides for Parliamentary democracy with an 
Executive responsible to the Legislature. Like American Constitution, it has 
armed the Judiciary to test the validity of the Parliamentary legislation on the 
touchstone of the constitutional provisions. 

The Constitution guarantees to its citizens certain fundamental rights— 
right to equality, right to freedom of speech and religion, right to property 
and to constitutional remedies— rights which are essential for the development 
of human personality. In this, the Indian Constitution has gone a step forward 
than the Bill of Rights incorporated in the Constitution of the U. S. A. 
Constitution is the Supreme Law of the'Lapd, and naturally during the course 
of the last 22 years a number of commentaries, written by eminent men of l3w 
and learing, have come out on the Constitution. 

Sri Jai Narain Paodey, the author of this book, is a teacher of law in the 
University of Allahabad. He has Jong felt the need of a bandy volume giving 
an integrated picture of the Constitution to the University students. He has 
made this attempt in that direction. 

I have read some portions of this book. I find that Sri Pandey has 
succeeded in giving a brief but lucid exposition of the main characteristics of 
the Constitution. He has also noticed the important authoritative pronounce- 
ments of the Supreme Court at appropriate places. I hope the book will 
prove useful not only to the University students but also to those who ate in 
the profession of law. 


Allahabad : 

9th December. 1969. 


//. C. P. Tripathi, 

Judge, High Court, Allahabad. 



PREFACE TO THE TENTH EDITION 


The last edition or the book appeared at a time when the Sixth Lok Sabha 
was dissolved and mid-term election was ordered by the President. At that 
time a serious doubt was expressed by constitutional jurists about the outcome 
of the election results. It was then feared that no party would be able to 
obtain majority and an era of Coalition Governments W3S likely to com- 
mence, threatening t be very fabric of Indian polity. Fortunately, the Indian 
electorate demonstrated an exceptional sense of political maturity and voted 
for a strong and stable Government. The Congress Party headed by 
Srimati Indira Gaadhi, which was completely routed in the 1977 elections, 
secured a specticular majority in the Lok Sabha poll and formed the Govern- 
ment at the Centre. This makes it amply clear that the Indian Constitution 
has successfully withstood the political turmoils faced by the country during the 
last decade and also that the political institutions established by it are capable 
enough to delivering goods to the teeming millions of this country provided 
our political leaders work with honesty and sincerity. Alas ? Honesty is the 
rarest quality found amongst our political leaders. Why then we blame the 
Constitution for our own failures ? 

Since the publication of the last edition two significant constitutional 
developments have taken place. First, by the Constitutional 45th Amendment 
Act, 1980, the duration of the reservation of seats in the Lok Sabha and the 
State Assemblies for Scheduled Castes ahd Scheduled Tribes has been extended 
for a further period of ten years making it forty years from the commencement 
of the Constitution. How long this reservation will continue would depend 
upon the good sense of our leaders. This change has been incorporated in 
this edition. 

Secondly, a judicial pronouncement of great significance has been delivered 
by the Supreme Court in the case Minerva Mills v. Union of India, (unreported). 
In that case, the Supreme Court, applying the principles laid down in 
Kesavananda Bharati’s case, has struck down Art. 3IC (which gave primacy to 
Directive Principles over the Fundamental Rights) and sub-clauses (4) and (f) 
of Art. 368 (which conferred on Parliament unlimited amending power) on the 
ground that it destroys and damages the “basic features” of the Constitu- 
tion. The above mentioned Articles were added to the Constitution by the 
Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 which was enacted during the 
emergency. The order of the Court makes it clear that the Constitution — not 
Parliament— is supreme in India. Indeed this is the very spirit of a written 
Constitution. This decision is to be welcomed by all. It is hoped that the 
Government will also accept this decision and will not try to undo it by amend- 
ing the Constitution or by filing a petition to review the Kesavananda ruling. 
This order has been incorporated in this edition. 

This edition also incorporates all important judicial pronouncements by 
the Supereme Court of India reported upto March 1980. 

The present edition, it is hoped, will continue to serve its readers like its 
earlier editions. 


2CfI Baghambari Road, 
Allahabad. 

5th June, I9S0. 


J. N. Pandey. 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 


The Fudamental law of the land is its Constitution. Consequently 
constitutional law is a subject of paramount importance. Eminent and distin- 
guished authors have written authoritative books on this lively subject. The 
highest Judicial Tribunal of the country has also given From time to time 
. authoritative pronouncements on some of the most intricate and fundamental 
aspects of the Indian Constitution. 

In my opinion, however, the books written on the Indian Constitution 
being in a commentary style do not adequately fulfil the needs of the students 
as they fail to give a coherent and integrated picture. As a teacher of the 
Constitutional law, I have felt the need of a text book succinctly explaining the 
basic principles of the Indian Constitution. An attempt is, therefore, made 
in this book to enunciate the underlying concepts of the Indian Constitution 
and to briefly comment on its basic structure. In dealing with the subject, I 
have also referred to the relevant provisions of the other Constitutions notably 
U. S. A., U. K., Australia and Canada wherever necessary. 

This book is primarily meant for LL. B. and LL. M Students of the 
Indian Universities. It is, however, expected that it will also prove useful 
to those who are preparing for the various Competitive Examinations. 
The usefulness of the book is judged by those for whom It is meant. I shall 
consider my labour to have been amply rewarded if the book could be be ] pful 
to the students of law in appreciating the essential characteristics of the Indian, 
Constitution. 

I crave the indulgence of the readers of any error or imperfection which 
might have, despite the best possible endeavours, dept in this work. Any 
• suggestion for improvement of the book shall be gratefully welcomed. 

I must express my thanks to my colleague and friend Shri U. P. D. 
Kcsari, who inspired me to write this book and to my friend Shri S. N. Misra, 
Lecturer, from whom I have received valuable suggestions on numerous occa- 
sions. My grateful thanks are also due to my reverend teachers Prof. V, N. 
Shukla, Dean Faculty of Law, University of Lucknow, and to Prof. S. N. 
Shukla, Dean Faculty of Law, University of Allahabad, for tbeir kind guidance 
and blessings. 

I must thank my pupil Shri Nisha Kant Pandcy, for his assistance in 
bringing out this book. 

I must record my thanks with gratitude, to the Hon'ble Mr. Justice, H.C.P. 
Trrpathi of the Allahabad High Court, who has given me useful advices and 
pleased to give it grace and honour by bis ‘•Foreword*’, 

In the end, I am grateful to the Publishers, the Central Law Agency, 
who induced roe to write the book and the painstaking co-operation and efforts 
in bringing it out in this excellent form. 

Introduction 

The Twenty-Sixth January. 1950, was a red letter dsy in the long and 
chequered history of India. For, on that day the present Constitution of 
India was brought into force which announced to the world the birth of a new 
Republic. 

What is a Constitution. — A Consti ution means a document having a 
special legal sanctity which sets out the frame-work and the principal functions 
of the organs of Government of a State and declares the principles governing 
the operation of those organs- 1 

What is Constitutional Law. — There is no hard and fast definition of 
Constitutional Law. In the generally accepted use of the term it means the 
rule which regulate the structure of the principal organs of the Government 
and their relationship to each other, and determine their principal functions. 
The rules consist both of legal rules in the strict sense and of usages, com- 
monly called conventions, which without being enacted are accepted as binding 
by all who are concerned in Government. Many of the rules and practices 
under which our system of Government is worked are not part of the law in 
the sense that their violation may lead directly to proceedings in a court of 
law. Though the constitutional lawyer is concerned primarily with the legal 
aspects of Government ; there fs required for a constitutional law some knowl- 
edge of the salient features of constitutional history and of the workings of our 
political institutions. 2 

Historical Background.— All Constitutions are the heirs of the past as 
well as the testators of the future.* The very fact that the Constitution of 
the Indian Republic is the product not of a political revolution but of the 
research nnd deliberations of a body of eminent representatives of the people 
who sought to improve upon the existing systems of administration, makes a 
retrospect of the constitutional development indispensable for a proper under- 
standing of this Constitution. 4 

No one will deny the truth of the above statement that if any one seeks 
to study the law, constitutional or other, of a country, a knowledge of the 
historical process which led to its present form is t indispensable for correct 
insight and understanding of subject. It is, however, not necessary to go 
to any rcriod beyond what is known as the 'British Period’ for the modern 
political institutions originated and developed in that period only. The 
political institutions established by the Hindus in the olden days and by the 
Muslims in the medieval period have become a thing of the past, and they do 
not survive in any form in the present days. The British period in the history 
of India began with the incorporation of East India Company in the year 1600 
in England. Now, let us study the various phases of the growth of our Consti- 
tution from the advent of the English on Indian shore till this day. We can 
broadly divide the period as follows : 

1. 1600—1765 

2. 1765-1858 


1 . Wade and Philips— Co nslifutional Law, 7th Edition, p. I. 

3 Jenninps— Some Characteristics of the Indian Constitution. 11951), p. 56. 

4. Bam. 0. 13.— Introduction lo the Constitution of India. Third edition 1964, p. 3 



2 


C0NS1 ITUTIOHAL tAW OF INDIA 


iChar 


3 . 1858—1919 

4. I9t9 — 1947 

5. 1947-1950. 

I. 1600 TO 1765— THE COMING OF THE BRITISH 
The Coming of British —The Britishers came to India in 1600 as traders 
in the form of East lndin Company. Altracied by the stories of the fabutous 
wealth of India and fortified by the adventurous maritime activity of the 
Elizabethan era. Englishmen were eager to establish commercial contracts with 
the East.* To facilitate such a venturesome of the enterprising merchants 
of London formed themsehes into a company. The company secured for it a 
Charter from Queen Elizabeth in December, 1600, which settled its constitu- 
tions, powers and privileges. The Charter vested the management of the 
company in the hands of a Governor and 24 members who were authorised to 
organise and send trajing expeditions to the East India. The Charter granted 
the company a monopoly of trade with the East. It had authority to keep an 
armed naval force for its security. The Charter was granted in the first 
instance for 15 years and was terminable on two > cars’ notice. It could be 
renewed if the interest of the Crown and the people were not prejudicially 
affected 

Fortified with the Charter the company started establishing its trading 
centres or factories at several places in India. The first settlement of the com- 
pany was at Surat (1612) which was established as a result of a Royal ‘Firman* 
from the Emperor Jehangir granting her land and other concessions. This was 
followed by Musulipatum— Madras (1639) and later at Hariharpur tn Maha- 
nadi Delta (1690). Thus in the course of time the factories at Bombay, 
Madras and Calcutta became the chief settlements or presidencies or the 
company. The administration of these presidencies was carried on by a 
President and a Council composed of the servants of the company. 

During this period except in case of Bombay which had been ceded with 
full sovereignty to the British Crown, wherever the English settled they did so 
with the consent of the Indian rulers. The natural consequence of their posi- 
tion would have been their submission to the law of the place. But any how 
they secured the permission or the local kings to retain their own laws As 
lllbert observes : “In India concessions granted by or wrested from native 
rulers gradually established the company and rhe Crown as territorial sovereigns 
in rivalry with othei country powers and finally left the British Crown exercis- 
ing undivided sovereignty throughout British India, the paramount anlhonty 
over the subordinate native States . 3 

Legislative Pmer .—' The Charier of 1601 granted to the Governor and 
company the power to make, ordain and constitute such and so many 
reasonable laws, constitutions, orders and ordinances for the good governance 
of the company. 



INTRODICTION 


3 


Though limited in scop;, but the legislative powers of the company was of 
great historical importance as it is “the germ out of which the Anglo-Indian 
Codes were ultimately developed.” 1 

By the Charters of 1609 and 1661 similar powers were affirmed. The 
Charter of 1693 makes no mention of legislative powers. 

The Charter of 1726. — The Charter of 1726 had a great legislative signi- 
ficance. Hitherto, the legislative pow.*r was vested m the Court of Directors 
in England. They were not conversant with the conditions prevailing m India. 
It was, therefore, considered desirable to vest law-making power in those who 
were acquainted with the Indian conditions. Accordingly, the Charter authorised 
the Governor and Council of the three Presidencies to make, constitute 
and ordain bye-laws, rules and ordinances for the government of the Com- 
pany and impose punishments for their contravention. These bye-laws, rules 
and ordinances and punishments were to be reasonable and not contrary to the 
laws and statutes of England and they were to be elfective unless approved and 
confirmed in writing by the Company's Court of Directors. The Charter also 
established the Mayor’s Courts at Calcutta, Bombay and Madras and expressly 
introduced English laws into these Presidencies. 

But the Britishers bad not become a ruling power in India until the 
second-half of the 18th century. It was still a trading concern. Thereafter, 
events of great importance look place in the interior of Bengal. It was a period 
of gradual disintegration of the Moghul Empire. Its last strong Emperor 
Aurangzcb was deaj. Sooa after the death of Aurangreb the controlling and 
powerful unifying force that existed in country under the rule of Aurangzcb 
declined and India became a battleground of rival contesting principalities. 
The East India Company took full advantage of this chaotic situation and 
gradually established itself as the unrivalled master of the Indian Sub-Continent. 
The victory of the Company in the battle of Plasscy ia 1757 against Sirajud- 
daulla, Nawab of Bengal, had laid the foundation of the British Empire in 
India. In I7d5 Shah Alam granted the Diwani, /. c. the responsibility of the 
collection of revenue to the Company, which automatically involved the 
administration of civil justice. As Illbert has said, — "The year 1765 makes 
a turning point in the Anglo-Indian History and may be treated as commenc- 
ing the period of territorial savereigntly by the East India Company". The 
Company henceforth threw off the mask of traders and appeared in the true 
garb of rulers. 

2. 1765 TO 1853-BEGINNING OF THE BRITISH RULE 

Regulating Act of 1773.— The grant of Diwani made the East India 
Company real masters of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. As a result of Diwani the 
company became responsible for the administration of civil justice and collec- 
tion of land revenue. But it was very difficult for the company— a trading 
body — to administer this vast territory. It did rot, therefore, tookover these 
functions immediately The administration of civil justice and collection of 
revenue was, therefore, left to Indians. The company, however, appointed two 
English officers to supervise the working of this system. This system rroved 
to be harmful for the country. The Indian officials who were responsible for 
administration had no effective power to enforce their decisions. On the other 
hand, the company’s servants who were real rulets had no responsibility and 
they exploited the situation for their selfish ends. 

They were directly responsible to the Court of Directors in England. 
The Governors and Councillors were appointed from among senior servant* of 
the Company. They had manifold business to perform. Under the Governor 


I. Illbot— Government of tnJiz. 191 $, p- 10. 



2 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


lO-ap 


3 . 1858—1919 

4. 1919—1947 

5. 1947-1950 

I. 1600 TO 1765-THE COMING OF THE BRITISH 
The Coming of British.-— The Britishers came to India in 1600 as traders 
in the form of East India Company. Attracted by the stories of the fabulous 
wealth of India and fortified by the adventurous maritime activity of the 
Elizabethan era, Englishmen were eager to establish commercial contracts with 
the East.' To facilitate such a venture some of the enterprising merchants 
of London formed themselves into a company. The company secured for it a 
Charter from Queen Elizabeth in December, 1600, which settled its constitu- 
tions, powers and privileges. The Charter vested the management of the 
company in the hands of a Governor and 24 members who were authorised to 
organise and send trading expeditions to the East India. The Charter granted 
the company a monopoly of trade with the East. It had authority to keep an 
armed naval force for its security. The Charier was granted in the first 
instance for 15 years and was terminable on two years’ notice. It could be 
renewed if the interest of the Crown and the people were not prejudicially 
affected. 

Fortified with the Charter the company started establishing its trading 
centres or factories at several places in India. The first settlement of the com- 
pany was at Surat (1612) which was established as a result of a Royal ‘Firman* 
from the Emperor Jebangir granting her land aDd other concessions. This was 
followed by Musulipattam— Madras (1639) and later at Hariharpur in Maha- 
H 3 di Delta (1696). Thus in the course of time the factories at Bombay, 
Madras and Calcotta became the chief settlements or presidencies of the 
company. The administration of these presidencies was carried on by a 
President and a Council composed of the servants of the company. 

During this period except in case of Bombay which had been ceded with 
full sovereignty to the British Crown, wherever the English settled they did so 
with the consent of the Indian rulers. The natural consequence of iheir posi- 
tion would have been their submission to the law of the place. But any how 
they secured the permission of the local kings to retain their own laws As 
lllbert observes: “In India concessions granted by or wrested from native 
rulers gradually established the company and the Crown as territorial sovereigns 
in rivalry with olhei country powers and finally left the British Crown exercis- 
ing undivided sovereignty throughout British India, the paramount authority 
over the subordinate native Slates . 1 2 

Legislative Power — The Charter of 1601 granted to the Governor and 
company the power to make, ordain and constitute such and so many 
reasonable laws, constitutions, orders and ordinances for the good governance 
of the company. 

The legislative power of the company was very limited in its scope and 
character. They were not to be contrary to the laws, statutes or customs of 
England. The power conferred under the Charter was essentially a power of 
mirror legislation prohibiting any ftrndatnentaf change m the principles of 
English law. It was not a power to legislate for some territory because the 
company was purely a trading concern and not a political sovereign acquiring 
foreign territory The legislative power was thus designed to enable the com- 
pany to regulate its business and to maintain discipline among its servants. 

1. Pylee, M. V. — Constitutional History of India, p. I. 

2. lllbert— The Government of India, 2nd Edition, 1907. p. 1. 



11 


INTRODUCTION 


5 


General. The Councillors wire to hold office for 5 years and could not be 
removed earlier except by the King on the recommendations of the Court or 
Directors. The Council was to take decision by a majority. The Governor- 
General bad a casting vote io case of a tie in the council. The council was 
also vested with ‘the power of superintendence and control of Governments 
of Bombas and Madras Presidencies in matters of war and peace except 
in case of emergency when they could take orders from the Directors in 
London. The Governor in-Council of the two presidencies were required Co 
pay due obedience to the orders of the Governor-Gcneral-in-Council of Ben- 
gal and to transmit to them regularly information regarding all transactions 
relating to the Government’s revenue or interests of the Company. The 
Governor- General-in Council of Bengal had power to suspend any offending 
Governor and his Council. 1 Thus the Governor-General of Bengal and his 
Council became supreme authority ol India. 

Thus, the Act of 1773 took the first step in the centralisation of Adminis- 
trative machinery in India. 

(c) Legislative power.— The Act empowered the Governor-General and 
Council to make rules, ordinances and regulations for the gooJ Government 
of the Company’s sttlements at Fort William and factories subordinate 
thereto. But their legislative power was subject to the following restrictions — 
(l) they were not to be repugnant to the laws of England ; (2) they were to be 
reasonable 1 P) they were not valid until “duly registered and published in 
the Supreme Court". The legislative power was thus controlled by the Sup- 
reme Court. They could beset aside by the King-in-Council on the applic- 
ation of any person or persons in India or in England. 

<d) Supreme Court —The Act also provided for the establishment of a 
Supreme Court at Calcutta consisting of a Chief Justice and three other judges 
who were to be a barrister of at least 5 years’ standing. They were to be 
appointed by the Crown and were to hold office during his pleasure, The Court 
was vested with civil, criminal, admiralty and ecclesiastical jurisdictions. Its 
jurisdiction extended to all British subjects residing in Bengal and Orissa and 
to hear all complaints against any of His Majesty’s subject for crimes, misde- 
meanours of oppressions and to suits, actions and complaints against any 
person employed by or in the service of the Company or of any of His 
Majesty’s subjects. The Governor-General and Councillors and Judges of the 
Supreme Court were exempt from airest or imprisonment in any action or 
suit or proceeding in the court. Appeal from the Supreme Court lay to the 
King-in-Council in Engtand. The Court was to try cases by jury. 

The object of the Act was good but the system that it established was 
imperfect. It suffered from many defects, i. e. (1) It did not define clearly the 
relationship of the Governor-Genera! and his Council and the Supreme Court 
with each other. (2) It did not make clear as to what law the Supreme Court 
was to administer. (3) It placed the Governor-General at the mercy of bis 
Council. 

Act of 1781.— To remove the defects of the Regulating Act of 1773, 
Parliament passed the Act of Settlement of 1781. The Act of Settlement of 
1781 made the following changes in the Regulating Act — (1) It exempted the 
actions of the public servants of the Company done in official capacity from 
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. (2) It tried io settle the question of 
jurisdiction of the court over servants of the Company and the native inhabi- 
tants (3) It made it clear as to what law was to be applied by the Supreme 
Court. (4) The Act recognised and confirmed the appellate jurisdiction of 


1. Sect ion 9 cf ihe Act. 



4 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDtA 


{Chap. 


and ihc Council was a body of civil and military servants. These servants 
were classified into writers, factors— Junior and Senior — and merchants. 1 he 
salaries of these servants of the Company was ridiculously small _ In the 
circumstances, these low-paid servants of the Company used their official 
position freely to get rich quickly and extracted presents, bribes and levies from 
the ooor people. As Lecky has said "Never before the natives experienced a 
tyranny which was at once so skilful, so searching and stroog...\vhole districts 
which had been populous and flourishing were at last utterly depopulated, and 
it was noticed that on the appearance of a party of English merchants the 
villages were at once deserted and the shops shut, and roads thronged with 
panic-stricken fugitives. * 

Such was the administration of the Company after the Battle of Plassey. 
The servants of the Company exploited the Indians, amassed wealth and return - 
ed to England The suffering of the people reached to maximum when there 
was a great famine in Bengal. The climax was reached when the Company 
approached the British Government for a huge loan It was indeed a strange 
thing that while its servants were getting richer, the Company was heading to- 
wards bankruptcy. All those led the British public to suspect that something 
was palpably wrong with the administration of the Company. The members 
of the British Parliament attracted the attention of the British Government 
towards the sorry state of Company's administration. A Secret Committee was 
appointed by the House of Commons to inquire into the alfairs of the Com- 
pany on 13th April, 1772. The Committee in its reports, exposed several 
defects deficiencies la the administration of East India Company and 
suggested that the affairs of the Company must be regulated by Parliament. 
Consequently, the Parliament passed the Regulating Act of 1773. 

The Act of 1773 is of great constitutional importance because it asserted 
for the first time the right of Parliament to regulate the affairs of the East India 
Company. This Act is the first Act of British Parliament which established a 
definite system of Government in India. If did the following things— (a) Chang- 
ed the constitution of ihe company in England, (b) Reorganised the Govern- 
ment in Calcutta. (c) Brought the Presidencies of Bombay and Madras to 
some extent, under the control of the Governor-General of Bengal, (d) Estab- 
lished a Supjeme Court a I Calcutta 


(a) Home Government.— Prior to the Regulating Act the affairs of the 
Company was managed by the Court of Directors containing 24 members 
elected annually by the Court of Proprietors. A shareholder who held shares 
worth £500 bad right to elect the Directors. The tenure of Directors was only 
one year. The period of one year was too sbojt to enable a director to acquire 
a grip over Company’s affairs, and they had to please a larg number of proprie- 
tors to secure re-election and were thus on the mercy of shareholders. The 
Regulating Act restricted the soring right to those shareholders who held shares 
of worth X 1,000 and increased the -term of o'! ice of Directors to 4 years, 1/4 
of them retiring every year. The Directors were required to submit all corres- 
pondence from the Governor-Genera! in India relating to revenue to Ihe 
Treasury and those relating to the Civil and Military Government to one of 
the Sectetary of State. Thus, the Act strengthened the control of the British 
Government over the Company. 

. , ^° rm . , of Government of India.— Prior to the passing of the Regulating 

Act, three Piesidencws were separate and independent of one another. They 
had direct dealings with the Court of Directors io England. The Act of! 773 
* a _ Gove i r n°r-General and four Councilors for the Presidency of Fort 
william in Bengal and vested in them “the whole civil and military Govern- 
ment of the Calcutta Presidency. The Act itself named the first Governor- 
General and his four Councillors. Warren Hastings was to be first Governor- 



I] 


INTRODUCTION 


7 


Coromander-in-Cbief, four members of the Council, and six legislative mem- 
bers of whom two were English Judges of the Calcutta Supreme Court and 
the other four were officials, appointed by the local Governments of Madras, 
Bombay, Bengal and Agra. In this manner the local representation was intro- 
duced for the first time in the Indian Legislature. Legislation was for the first 
time treated as a special function of the Government requiring special machi- 
nery and special process. 

But no law made by the Council could be promulgated without the assent 
of the Governor-General who had the power to veto any Bill of the Legislative 
Council. The Act made a separate Governor-General for Bengal. The direc- 
tors were deprived of their privileged power of appointment. It was a severe 
blow to the Court of Directors. According to Pttnniah, it paved the way for 
the transfer of Indian Territories to the Crown. The Mutiny of 1857 only 
accelerated this process and brought the career or the East India Company to 
an end. 

3. 1858 TO 1919— END OF COMPANY’S RULE 

The Government of India Act. 1858.—' The objective of the Pitts India 
Act which introduced a Double Government failed. The Board of Control 
failed to have proper control over Company’s affairs. As a result, the 
Company’s Government in India become thoroughly irresponsible. In the 
words of the Prime Minister, Lord Palmerston, the Double Covcnment 
was inconvenle it, cumbrous and complex At this stage, when the circums- 
tances were going against the Company, the Mutiny of 1857, the first war of 
Independence, gave death blow to the company’s rule. Asa result of all 
this, the British Parliament passed the Act foi the better Government of India, 
1858. 

The Act of 1855 transferred Government of India from the Company 
to the British Crown. India was henceforth to Be governed by and in the 
name of her Majesty. The Board of Control and the Courts of Directors 
were abolished and their powers were transferred to one of Her Majesty’s 
Sccietarics of State. The powers of the Crown were to be exercised by the 
Secretary of State for India assisted by a Council of 15 members. This was 
known as the ’Council of India’. Eight of its members were to be appointed by 
the Crown and the remaining seven were to be elected by the Court of Direc- 
tors. Future vacancies were to bo filled up by the Crown 

The Council was an advisory body. The Secretary of State was made 
the Chairman of the Council. The Secretary of State was required to lay 
before the Parliament on account of the annual produce of the revenues of 
India, tie was reqiured to submit to Parliament annually a statement of the 
moral and material progress of India. The Law member and the Advocate- 
General of the Governor-General-in-Council of India were to be appointed by 
the King. 

The Act of IS5S constituted the Secretary n r State 5n Council as a body 
corporate, capable of suing and being sued in India and in England. 

The transfer of Company's Government to the British Crown was 
announced b> a ‘Royal Proclamation* made by the Queen of England. The 
proclamation has a great constitutions! importance. According to Mr. 
G. N. Siogh “the passing of the Government of India Act. IS5F, closer! 
one great period of Indian history and ushered in another great era— the direct 
rule of the Crown'*.* 

Indian Council Act of 1861.— The InJiau Council Act of 1«6I was of basic 
improtance. it brought about the beginning or the representative institutions. 

I- O.N Sirs**.— landmark w Itdiaii Ccesiitctiowl %od Naiieeal DevtlCf meat, p, 73- 



£ CONSIlTU I lONAL tAW Ol INDIA (C< ap. 

the Governor-Gene ral-in-Council in cases decided by th: Muffosil Courts. (5) 

It empowered the Govcrnor-General-ia-Council to frame regulations for the 
Provincial Courts and Councils also. 

Pitts India Act, 17(14 -The Act of Settlement of 1781, however, could not 
cure the defects of the Regulating Act anJ agitation for an effective control 
over the comp toy's Indian afTairs continued. The matter wes raised in the 
Parliament. Consequently, Parliament appointed two Committees. The Com- 
mittee recommended for the recall of the Governor-General, Warren Hastings 
and the Chief Justice lmpey. But the Court of Proprietors refused to recall 
them. This demonstrated the very inadequate degree of Parli imentary control 
over the Company and its administration. To remedy this situation the Pitts 
India Act was passed by the Parliament. 

The Act distinguished between commercial and political functions of 
the Company. The Court of Directors were allowed to manage commercial 
affairs of the Company, but for political affairs a Board of Six Commissioners, 
Known as Board of Control, was appointed to control such affairs. The 
Commissioners were appointed by the King and were to hold office during his 
pleasure. The Board empowered to superintend, direct and control all opera- 
tions of the civil and military Government of the British possessions in the 
East Indies. But the Court of Directors were still strong ; they had retained 
their vast patronage and had right to appoint and dismiss their servants in 
India, initialing policies and receiving all information from India. The 
function of Board of Control was merely to revise and control over the dotugs 
of the Directors. 

The Charter Act of 1793 renewed the Company's monopoly of trade for 
a further period of 20 years. 

The Charter Act of 1813 —The Charter was preceded by the most search- 
ing investigation by a Committee of the House of Commons into the financial 
affairs of the Company. Although the Act renewed the Charter for a further 
period of 20 years, it took away the exclusive right or the Company to trade 
in India The Indian trade was thrown open to all British merchants. By 
the Charter of 1813 the British Crown asserted a greater control over the power 
or the Councils. Henceforth the regulations made by the three Councils in India 
were required to be laid before the Parliament, fhe monopoly of East India 
Company was taken away and Indian trade was thrown open to all British 
subjects. 

The Charter Act of 1833.— The Charter Act of 1833 introduced important 
changes in the constitution of the legislatures in India. The Governor-General 
of Bengal was made the Governor-General of India. The Act vested the 
legislative power solely in the Governor-Genera 1-in Council. The Governor- 
General-in Council was empowered to make Jaws and regulation* for all 
persons, places and things within the territory of the Company. The Council 
was enlarged for legislative work by the addition of a fourth member-thc Law 
Member— who had no voice in executive matters. But this power was not to 
extend to the enactment of law with respect to certain specified matters. 
There was also express saving of the right of Parliament to make laws for 
India. 

The laws made under the previous Acts were called Regulations but the 
laws made under the Act of 1833 were called Acts of Parliament. 

The Charter Act of 1853.— This was the last of the Charter Acts enacted 
between 1793 and 1853. The Charter of 1853 took a decisive step in separat- 
ing the legislative machinery from the executive. The Act created a separate 
Legislative Council for India consisting of 12 members. The Council of 
the Governor-General was enlarged for legislative purposes by the addition 
of 6 new members. The 12 members were the Governor-General, the 



n 


nCTRODUCUOS 


9 


by admitting a considerable proportion of elected members as well as an 
increase m their powers. 

The Viceroy Lord Dufferfn felt that the time had come to accept the 
demands of the Congress for reform serioulsy. He appointed a Committee 
and drew up plans for the enlargement of the Council and association of 
Indians with the work of Government. The report of the Committee was sent 
to the British Government. On the basis of these principles a Bill was intro- 
duced in tie Parliament which was passed after two years aod became the 
Indian Councils Act of 1S92. 

The Indian Councils Act, 1892 —The Indian Councils Act of I $92 achiev- 
ed three things : (a) it increased the number of members in the Central and pro- 
vincial Councils, (b) introduced the elective system partially, (c) enlarged the 
functions of the Councils. 

The Governor-General's Council was to have not less than 10 and not 
more than 16 members. He was empowered to make regulations for the 
nomination of additional members. In Bombay and Madras the number was 
to be not less than S and not more than 20. The maximum for Bengal was 
used at 20 and for the North West Provinces and Oudh at 15. 

The Councils were to have power of discussing the budget and subject 
to certain restrictions to ask questions from the Government. But the Presi- 
dent of the Council had the power to disallow any question without giving a 
reason. 


It »s true that the Act laid down the foundation of the representative 
Government but it also suffered from many defects. The first defect was that 
the system of election introduced by it was defective. It did not give the 
representation to the people in the real sense. Certain classes of people were 
oxer-represented while others had no representation at all. In the Bombay 
Council 6 scats were allotted to the European merchants but the Indian 
merchants were given none. Secondly, the power of Legislative Councils were 
very limited. The members had no right to ask questions on budget. Thirdly, 
the number of non-official members was very small. 

Although the Act of 1892 fell far short of the demands made by the 
Indian National Congress, yet it can be said that it was a great advance upon 
the existing state of things. It certainly paved the way or future progress by 
conceding the principles of elections and giving the Legislative Councils some 
control over the Executive. 

The Morley-Mmto Reforms— The Indian Councils Act of 1909. — The first 
attempt at introducing a representative and popular element was made by the 
Morley-M^Q Reforms, known bv names of the Secretary of State ^ 
Morley) and the Vicerov (Lord Mintol which were implemented by tne 
Indian Councils Act, 1909. By this Act the members of the Councils were 
increased. The size of Central Legislative Council was greatly enlarged by this 
of60 numb er of additional members was raised from 16 to a maximum 


By the Act of 1909 the powers of the Legislative Councils, both Central 
anw ^ rov,nc ' a k were enlarged. Now the Councils were empowered to discuss 
j matter, ask questions and supplementary que-tions. 

c * I ^ 1S Councils had also the right of discussing and moving a resolution on 
" ° nan c?al statement but they were not given the power of voting. 

4 1919 To 1947— INTRODUCTION OF SELF-GOVERNMENT 

1910 ^‘-v«T be Monf a gu-Cbelmsford Report — The Government is the 
w -— The next landmark in the constitutional development of I 


Cons —2 



CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 

?ht *' t a« s d ‘!';jsz c ;\1 st .ss 

General for the purpose of *" “iS membeifs’ : half oflhese 
° ! m °Z putative Council was given .he 

li ons for all person.. Courts of Jusuce, P'““ and t “‘" r f d ugSa.i.r pow™ 
inside and oS, side the Madras. The Pro™™ 

to the Presidency Governments ot Bom y f or the benefit of «“ 

Legislative Councils were ernpoweredt m Bin passed by the Legis- 

Province. The Governor- General s _ as« l on ’ ^ bccomc an Act. 

lathe Council was necessary and 1 only ' then it w vet0 any Bill. He 

addition to this. the Govemo -Gene al bad m ^ powef l? a t« .*« 

was also empowered to issue ordmance T ii C provincial 1-6 ^ 

limits of tbe Provinces, Presidencies ‘° 6 .hat might alter the Acs of 

tures were not empowered to make any mw*. 

Central Legislature. a,., n f1 861 is important in the 

W37 ' The India. Counei, Ac, of 

mi.ed power to the »* ‘■"TTo” S 

* *= — 1 

. no interest in the legislation for India. 


terest in the legislation for India. d from igfil 

Th ~ noliti'al situation in India was very explosive., f3Ctor that 

appointment at the non-fui fitment . ,. e development ol^ 

Indian press and the vernacular literature . (5) the^^^rs . aod (6) tbe 

of communications and the folding of 1®P«' 1 ioso lent of 

in feeling of racial bitterness due to the* n ° f 6 wd Lytton and * b % d ‘EoS 
ruling race, the plundering administration of Ly oa b y Eur P 

violent temper and organised scurrilous propagana 

and Anglo Indians over the Illbert Bill. ^ , oes 0 nd in its fi« l sess, °f 


Anglo inaians uvci in 

J expansion of the lcs> 
Coin— - 


, „e ■ vat founded in 1885 an a sys , eD t • 

passed resolution expressing grave dUsatisfMttoo id » UE istottvc Cou “ 
Government and demanded reform and expansion u 

1. G. N. Singh.— Landmarks in Indian 



1] INIRODUCIION J1 

the power of certifying any Bill or grant refused to be passed or made by the 
Legislature, in which case it would have the same effect as if it was passed or 
made by the Legislature. Fourthly, he could make Ordinances, having the 
force of law for a temporary period, in cases of emergency. 

4. Structure of Government to remain unitary . — The Central Legislature 
had power to legislate on any matter. So it was not possible to challenge the 
validity of the Central laws. In case of controversy it was the Governor- 
General and not the Courts, who had the authority to decide whether a parti- 
cular subject was a Central or Provincial subject. Thus, the Government of 
India remained a unitary and centralized Government wiih the Governor- 
General in-Council as the key-stone of the whole constitutional edifice. 

Shortcomings of the Act of J919. — The Reforms of 1919, however, 
failed to fulfil the aspirations of the people in India, which led to an agitation 
by the Congress for ‘Swaraj’ or 'self-Government’ to be attained through non- 
co-operation. 

Non-Fulfilment of the demand for responsible Government. — Though the 
Act gave a substantial measure of power to the Provinces, yet the structure of 
the Central Government remained unitary and centralised with the Gov ernor- 
General-in-Council as the key-stone of the whole constitutional edifice, and it 
was through the Governor-General-in-Council that the Secretary of State and 
ultimately the Parliament discharged their responsibility for the peace, order 
and good Government of India. 1 It was the Governor-General and not the 
Courts who had the authority to decide whether a particular subject was 
Central or Provincial. The Provincial Legislature could not, without the 
previous sanction of the Governor-General, take up for consideration any Bill 
relating to a number of subjects. 

The Failure of Dyarchy.— The greatest difficulty came from the working 
of the system of Dyarchay in the Provinces. In a large measure the Governor 
came to dominate the ministerial policy by means of his overriding powers and 
the control over the official members in the Legislatures. The main defect of 
the system from the Indian point of view was the control of the purse. 
Finance, being a reserved subject, was placed in charge of a member of the 
Executive Council and not in charge of a Minister. Thus it was impossible 
for a Minister to implement any progressive measure for want of funds. 

There were no provisions for collective responsibility of the ministers to 
the Provincial Legislature, They were appointed individually and acted as 
advisers to the Governor and differed from the members of the Executive 
Council only in the fact that they were non-officials. 

Simon Commission — The persistent demand for further reforms led the 
British Government to appoint a Statutory Commission known as Simon 
Commission. The Government of India Act had provided for the appoint- 
ment of a Statutory Commission after the expiry of ten years of the passing 
of tbs Act to inquire ioto sod report od the wotleing of the Act io 1927. The 
Commission, headed by Sir John Simon, submitted its report in 1930. 

The report was considered at a Round Table Conference, consisting of 
the representatives of the British Government and of British India as well as 
the Rulers of the States. A white paper was prepared as the result of this 
Conference embodying the outlines of the reforms. The white paper was 
submitted to the Select Committee of the Parliament. In accordance with the 
recommendations of the Select Committee the Government of India Bill was 
introduced in the Parliament and passed with certain amendments as the 
Government of India Act, 1935. 

1. Report of the Joint Parliamentary Committee, VoL !, pp. 232-238. 



10 


Constitutional law of india 


[Chap. 


Montagu-Chelmsford Report which led to the enactment of the Government 
of India Act, 1919, 

The Mortey-Minto Reforms failed to satisfy the aspirations of the 

Indians as they did not establish Parliamentary system of Government in me 

country. 

Indian National Congress became very active during the time of the 1st 
World War and pressed for reforms. 


In response to this popular demand the British Government made a 
declaration on August 20, 1917, that the future policy of His Majesty s Govern- 
ment was that of “increasing association of Indians in every branch ot the 
administration and the gradual development of self-governing institutions with 
a view to progiessive realisation of responsible Government in British India as 
an integral patt or the British Empire”. No doubt this was the step which 
paved the path for the Independence of India. 

The main features of the Government of India Act, 1919, were as 
follows : 


1. The Declaration . — It promised a responsible Government to the 
Indians. 


2. Dyarchy in the Provinces.— The Act introduced a system of Dyarchy 
in the provinces. Dyarchy has been derived from tte Greek word ‘di-arche, 
means double rules The object of the Dyarchy was to train the natives in _ the 
act of self-Government. In matter of legislation subjects were divided into 
Central and Provincial. Subjects were further divided into two parts ‘reserved’ 
and ‘transferred*. Jail, Police, Justice, Finance and Irrigation, comparatively 
more important subjects, were the ‘reserved’ subjects and they were to be 
governed by the Governor and his Executive Council without any responsibility 
to the Legislature. Education, Agriculture. Local Self-Government, etc. 
subjects of lesser importance were transferred to the Indian Mini.ters and the 
Govirnors. The Governor could override both the Ministers and the Execu- 
tive Council. The Provincial Legislative Council was empowered to legislate 
in respect of provincial matters only. But thcie were many restrictions on 
their powers of legislation. In several cases the previous sanction of the 
Govcrnor-Gtneral was necessary. He had the power to stop the consideration 
of a Bill or a part of it. He could secure legislation on reserved subjects not- 
withstanding that the Council had not consented to it. He had also the power 
to veto Bills The proportion of the elected members was increased up to 70% 
in the Provincial Legislative Councils but the separate electorate for Muslims 
was continued. 


Cmtral Government . — The principle of responsible Government was 
not introduced in the Centre. The Central Goveinment remained responsible 
to the British Parliament through the Secretary of State. The Central Legis- 
lature was to have a bicameral legislature. It was now a more representative 
body. The Council ot State (Upper House) was composed of sixty members 
of whom thirty-four were elected and the Legislative Assembly (Lower House) 
was composed of 144 members of whom 104 were elected and the rest nominat- 
ed. Among the nominated members about 26 were officials. 


The powers of both the Houses were equal except that the power to veto 
a Bill was given exclusively to the Lower House. In respect to financial Bills 
both the Houses had equal powers. Thus the Central Legislature retained the 
power to legislate for the whole of India, relating to any subject. 


The Governor-General had overriding powers in respect of Central Legis- 
lature. Firstly, his prior sanction was required to introduce Bills relating to 
certain matters Secondly, he bad the power to veto or reserve for considera- 
tion of the Crown any Bill passed by the Indian Legislature. Thirdly, he had 



1] iNTRODUCItON 13 


4. Federal legislature . — The Federal Legislature was to consist of two 
Houses, , the Council of States and the Legislative Assembly. The Legislative 
Assembly (Lower House) was to consist of 375 members, 250 of British 
Indian Provinces and 125 representing the Indian States. Its tenure was. 
unless dissolved earlier, five years. 

The Council of States (Upper House) was to consist of 260 members, 
out of which 156 members were to represent British India. 6 of them repre- 
sentatives to be nominated by the Governor-General and the rest elected direct- 
ly. One hundred and four members were to be nominated by the Princes 
of the Indian States. 

The powers of the Federal Legislature were extremely limited. They had 
in general equal powers but demaads of supply of votes and financial Bills 
were to originate in the Lower House. If there was any difference between 
the two Houses, the Act provided for a joint session of the two Houses for 
solving the deadlock. 

5. Provincial Government. — The Provincial Executive was to consist of 
the Governor and a Councilor Ministers to advise him. The Governor was 
the head o f the Executive. Three types of powers were given to the Gover- 
nor ; (a) Discretionary, (b) Powers exercised ia his individual judgment ; 
(c) Powers to be exercised on the advice of the ministers. But in regard to 
matters involving his special responsibility he had right to override the advice 
given by the ministers. 

6. Provincial legislatures. — After this Act. the Legislatures of Bombay, 
Bengal, Madras, Bihar, Assam and the United Provinces were made bica- 
meral i. c.. two houses and in other five Provinces unicameral. The compo- 
sition of the Provincial Assembly varied from Province to Province. The 
voting qualifications for the membership of the Council were not the same 
in all Provinces. The principle of communal electorate was preserved in the 
election of the members of the Assembly. The normal duration of the 
Assembly was of five years. 

The Provincial Legislature had power to make laws on the subjects 
given in the Provincial list. They could also male laws on the subject in the 
Concurrent List. The power also extended to those residuary subjects which 
were assigned to it by the Governor-General. 

The previous sanction of the Governor and Governor-General for intro- 
ducing almost all the Bills was obligatory. Financial Bills could only be 
introduced on the recommendation of the Governor, No Bill passed by the 
Legislature could become an Act without the assent of the Governor. The 
Governor had the right to return Bills for reconsideration. The discretionary 
powers and the responsibilities of the Governor made him to act as a dictator 
jn the Provinces 

7. Distribution of Legislative power between the Centre anl the Provin- 
ces. — The Act made a three-fold division of power between the Centre 
and the Provinces— Federal List, Provincial List and Concurrent List. 

Federal List.— The Federal Legislature had exclusive power of legislation 
over the subjects mentioned in the Union List. The Union List consist- 
ed of 59 subjects. These subjects were subjects of national importance 
and essential and vital for the existence of the Federation. The most Impor- 
tant of them were external affairs, currency and coinage, navjt, military 
and air forces, census, etc. 

rroiincial List.— The Provincial Legislature bad exclusive jurisdiction to 



tcmstntnloNM. U* of tSDlA 


iChap 


11 

_ . mj:- i.t 10 x 5 The Government of India Act, 1935, 

Tbi Goveiomral o!1»Ja ltading a full tespon- 

dVc,taofV”V;cs?Smi l .he Ctn.rp, Provincial autonomy mt.1 a. 
Ml India Federation. 


Main Features of the Act : 

/. Alt India Federation . — The Act provided for the 
All-India Federation compelling ot the Deitish Indian Pr ™1“” da jfn, pr e- 
Stater who would desire to come into the Federation. While under a tn P 
vious Government of India Acts, the Government of India ""I »«. 

Act of 1935 proposed a Federation taking the provinces and the Indian Mates as 
™= uni. But the accession of .he States to the Federation eras op tonah It wU 
not be established until the States had given their assent to join the Federa 
lion. At the time of joining it. each ruler of the State was rcquir . 

an Instrument af Accession mentioning therein the eatentto tvhl.h It consented 
to surrender in authority to the Federal Government. Thc/ulcrJ or Indian 
States never gave their consent and thus the Federation envisaged by 
never came into being. 

2. Dyarchy at the Centre -The Act of IMS abolished dyoreby at .he 
Provincial level and introduced it at the Centre. " c £ u ''* c . a C11 hiects 

of the Centre was vested in the Governor-General. The Federal 6 J _ 
were divided into two categories— the ‘reserved’ and the ffa , ' 

(a) The administration of ‘reserved subjects’ like defence, external an , 
ecclesiastic affairs and tribal areas, was to be made by the uoyer 
General in his discretion with the help of Councillors appointee y 
him who were not responsible to the Legislature, (b) The ‘transfer 
subjects, on the other hand, were to be administered by the Governor-Genera 
who was to act on the advice of a Council of ministers who were responsim i 
to the Legislature. But even in regard to this latter sphere, be might an 
' n by the ministers, if any of his special responsi- 


As regards the special responsibilities, he was to act under the contro 
and direction of the Secretary of Stale for the Crown. 

3. Pro\ incial Autonomy. The important feature of the new Act was 
that it marked the beginning of Provincial Autonomy. It was definitely 
advance on the Act of 1919. The Act divided Legislative power between inc 
Provincial and Central Legislatures, and within its defined sphere the province 
were no longer delegates of the Central Government but were autonomous 
units of administration. To this extent the Government of India assutnen 
the role of a Federal Gavernment vis a vis the Provincial Governments, tboug 
the Indian States did not join to complete scheme of Federation. 

The executive authority of a Province was also exercised by a Governor 
on behalf of the Crown and not as subordinate of the Governor-General. 1 
Governor was required to act with the advice of ministers responsible to tec 
Legislature. 


But notwithstanding the Provincial Autonomy, the Act of 1935, retained 
the control of the Central Government over the Provinces in certain spheres 
requiring the Governor to act in bis discretion or in the exercise of his indivi- 
dual judgment in certain matters. In such matters, the Governor was to act 
without ministerial advice and under the control and directions of the Gov- 
ernor-General, and through him of the Secretary of State. 



1 } 


INTRODUCTION 


15 


Tie Cfippv Mission. — In the pent 1942 lie British Government realised 
that it was difficult to remain indifferent towards the Indian problem any lon- 
ger. Therefore on March 22, 1942, the British Government sent Sir Stafford 
Ciipps to negotiate with Indian leaders and secure their co-operation in the 
prosecution of Wai. Sir Stafford Crips suggested the following proposals 
for the settlement of the Indian problem : 

(a) Immediately after the end of war steps shall be taken to set up in 
India an elected body for framing a new Constitution of India. 

(b) Provision shall be made, as set out below, for participation of Indian 
States in the Constitution-making body. 


tci The British Government undertakes to accept and implement the 
Constitution so framed subject only to : li) The right of any province of British 
India, which is not prepared to accept the new Constitution, to retain its present 
constitutional position, provision being made for its subsequent accession if it 
so decides. If they so desire. His Majesty’s Government will be prepared to 
agree upon a new Constitution giving them the same full status of the Indian 
Union ; (ti) The signing of a treaty which shall be negotiated between His 
Majesty’s Government and the Constitution-making body. 


(d) The 'Constitution making body shall be camposed of persons elected 
by Provincial legislatures and nominated by the Indian Princes unless the 
leaders of Indian origin of the principal communities agreed upon some other 
form before the end of hostilities. 1 • ’ ' * 


(e) His Majesty’s Government must bear the responsibility for and retain 
the control and direction of defence of India. 


Comments on the proposal.— Indians were not satisfied with the above 
proposals and therefore they rejected it. The Indian leaders found in it the 
seed of the partition of the country. The main cause for its rejection was 
inadequacy of the proposals and the insistence of Congress on Cabinet 
Government 


The Labour Parly came into power in England. The Labour Govern- 
ment was more sympathetic towards India and wanted to solve the Indian 
problem. With this end in view, the Cabinet Mission was sent to India. 

The Cabinet Mission, 1946.— The Cabinet Mission came to India on .4th 
March, 1946 It consisted of three British Cubinet Ministers— Lord Pc thick 
Lawrence, Sir Stafford Cripps and Mr. Alexander. The Mission recommend- 
ed the following proposals : 

(1) There should be a Union of India embodying both British India and 
the States and with the exception, <jC certain reserved vahjecta. Ml subjects 
were to be retained by the States. 

(2) The paramountcy of Corwn was to lapse. 

(3) For the purpose of framing a new Constitution a Constituent Assem- 
bly was to be elected. 


(4) An interim Government to be set up having the support of major 
political parties. 

The proposals of Cabinat Mission were accepted and in July 1 46, 
ctetjons to Constituent Assembly took place. 

f n T * l . e Indlan Act, 1947.— The provisions of the Act were ns 


14 


coNsti iuiiqNal law of India 


[Chap. 


make laws on subjects mentioned in the State List, ft consisted of 54 
subjects which were subjects of local importance. The main amongst them 
were, police, provincial public services, education, etc. 

Concurrent List.— The Federal and Provincial Legislatures were to have 
concurrent powers to legislate on subjects mentioned in the Concurrent List. 
The subjects in the Concurrent List were essentially of a provincial and local 
nature but required a uniform policy throughout India. It contained 26 sub- 
jects. Criminal law, criminal prbeedure, civil procedure, marriage and divorce, 
arbitration, etc., were most important subjects amongst them. 

The Federal Legislature had the power to legislate with respect to the 
subjects enumerated in the Provincial List if a proclamation of emergency was 
made by the Governor-General. The Federal Legislature could also legislate 
with respect to a Provincial subject if the Legislatures of two or more Provinces 
desired this iu their common interest. 

In case of repugnancy in the concurrent field, a Federal law prevailed 
over a provincial law to the extent of the repugnancy. But if the Provincial 
law received the assent of the Governor-General or of His Majesty, having 
been reserved for their consideration for this purpose, the Provincial law was 
to prevail. The allocation of residuary power of legislation in the Act was 
unique. It was not vested in either of the Legislatures, Central or Provincial. 
But the Governor-General was empowered to authorise cither the Federal or 
the Provincial Legislature to enact a law with respect to any matter which 
was not enumerated in any of the three Legislative Lists. 

The Federal Court.— The Act established a Federal Court. The 
Federal Conrt had one Chief Justice and not more than six other Judges. 
The retiring age of these judges was sixty-five years. The necessary qualifi- 
cations for the Judges were also given in the Act. These Judges were ap- 
pointed by the Crown. 

Jurisdiction of Federal Court .— The Federal Court had three kinds of 
jurisdiction, i. e., original, appellate and advisory. The Court had exclusive 
original jurisdiction in any dispute between the Federation and its units or 
the units inter se. The appellate jurisdiction of the Federal Court extended to 
appeals fromt the judgment of any High Court in India to the Federal Court 
if the High Court certified that the case involved a substantial question of 
law as to the interpretation of the Government of India Act, 1935 or any 
order in Council made thereunder. 

An appeal could go to the Privy Council from decision of the Federal 
Court. The Federal Court had also advisory jurisdiction. The Governor could 
refer any question of law to the Court to obtain its opinion whenever he 
Hired to seek its advice. 

The Government of India Act, 1935, was greatly criticised by almost 
all the parlies of India. The Act came into force m regard to the Provinces in 
April, 1937, but the Central Government continued to be governed in accord- 
ance with the provisions of the Government of India Act, 1919, with minor 
amendments. The elections took place and popular ministries came into 
office in the Provinces but they lasted only for two years. 

In 1939 the 2nd World War broke out in Europe. The British Govern- 
ment declared India as a belligerent country at War with Germany. This was 
dene without consulting Indian leaders and the Indian Legislatures. Conse- 
quently, the Congress ministries resigned from office on the issue of participa- 
tion of India m the War. 



1 ] 


INTRODUCTION 


17 


AH Khan, Khwaja Nazimnddin, Sir Feroze Kh3n Noon, Suhrawardy, Sir 
Zafarullah Khan, Dr. Sachchid3nanda Sinha. 

The first meeting of the Assembly was held on 9th December, 1946, It 
was held in an atmosphere of uncertainty, because the Muslim League boy- 
cotted the Assembly. In spite of this, the Assembly made a substantial pro- 
gress and adopted an ‘Objective Resolution* which later became the Preamble 
of the Constitution. It appointed various Committees to deal with different 
aspects of the Constitution. The report of these committees formed the basis 
on which the first draft of the Constitution was prepared. On August 29, 1947, 
a Drafting Committee of 7 members was set up under the Chairmanship of Dr. 
Ambedkar. 

The Draft Constitution was published in January, 1948. The people of 
India were given S months to discuss the draft and propose amedments. As 
many as 7,635 amendments were proposed and 2,473 were actually discussed. 
The Constituent Assembly held 11 sessions. The Draft Constitution was 
considered for 114 days. In all, the Constituent Assembly sat for 2 years, II 
months and IS days. 

The new Constitution of India was adopted by the Constituent Assembly 
on 26th November, 1949 and signed by the President, Dr. Rajendra Prasad. 
Articles 5. 6, 7. S, 9, 60, 324, 3f 6 367, 379, 380.368, 391,392 and 393 came 
into force at odcc. The remaining provisions of the Constitution came 
into force on 26th January. 1950, which is the date of the commencement of 
this Constitution. 



16 


coj-simmoNAL iaw of india [Chap. 

1 . The Act provided for the creation of two independent Dominions, 
India and Pakistan from 15th August, 1947. 

2. Each Dominion was to have a Governor-General who was to be ap- 
pointed by the King. 

3. The Constituent Assemblies of both Dominions were empowered to 
frame laws for their respective territories till the new Constitution came into 
force. 

4. After August 15, J947 the British Government was not to control 
the Dominions or the Provinces. 

5. For the time being, till the new Constitutions were framed, each of the 
Dominions and the Provinces were to be governed by the Government of ladia 
Act, 1935. 

6. The post of Secretary of the Slate for Jndij was to be abolished and 
it was taken over by Secretaty of the Commonwealth of Nations. 

7 The Act proclaimed laps of British paramountcy over Indian 
States. 

The Indian Independence Act, 1947, came into force on August 15, 1947, 
when the British rule in India came to an end. 


5. 1947 TO 1950 -THE FRAMING OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION 

The struggle for independence was thus over by 15th August, 1947. But 
the attainment of independence was not an end in itself. It was only the 
beginning of a new struggle, the struggle to live as an independent nation and, 
at the same time, establish a democracy based on the ideals of justice, liberty, 
equality and fraternity. The need of a new constitution forming the basic law 
of the land for the realisation of these ideals was paramount Therefore, one 
of the first tasks undertaken by independent India was the framing of a new 
Constitution. 1 

As provided in the Cabinet Mission Plan the Constituent Assembly came 
into being in November, 1946. its members were elected by the Provicial 
Assembly by indirect election. Out of 296 seats for British India, the Cong- 
ress captured 'll scats and the Muslim League 73 seats The rest were not 
filled up 

Jt is to be noted that this Constituent Assembly could not be called a 
sovereign body It was brought about by the British Government and could 
be abolished by it. Its authority was limited. It was to work within the 
framework of the Cabinet Mission Scheme. It could not change the outlines 
of the Constitution as given in the Cabinet Mission Plan But on the passing 
or the Indian Independence Act of 1947, the above-mentioned limitations were 
removed. According to the terms of the Act of 1947 it became a sovereign 
body. It was not to work wilbin the framework of the Cabinet Mission Plan. 
It was free to frame any constitution it pleased. 


The important members of the Costituent Assembly were Jawabar Lai 
Nehru, Rejendra Prasad, Sardar Patel. Maulana Azad, Gopalaswami Ayyangar, 
Goymd Ballabh Pant, Abdul Ghaffar Khan, T. T. Krisbnaraachari, Alladi 
Kristinas waroi Ayyar, H. N. Kunzru. Sir H. S. Gain, K. V. Shah, Masani 
Achat y a Kripalani, Dr. Ambedkar, Dr. Radha Knshnan, Dr. Jayakar. Liaquat 


l. Fjtee. M V. — Constitutional History of India, p. 24. 



2 ] 


Nature of thB Indian coNsnrutiON 


19 


the criterion. Is the federal prcnciplz predominant in the constitution ? If so, 
that constitution may he called a “federal constitution”. If, on the other hand, 
there are so many modifications in the application of the federal principle 
that it ceases to be of any significance, then the constitution cannot be 
termed as federal. This appears to be the most instructive and responsible 
way in which to use the term ‘federal constitution’. It seems essential to define 
federal principle rigidly, but to apply the term “federal constitution” more 
widely. 1 2 Thus Dr. Wheare accepts that exceptions are permissible provided the 
federal principle is predominantly retained in the Constitution. 

Essential characteristics of a federal Constitution. — A federal constitution 
usually has the following essential characteristics 

(1) Distribution of Powers. — The distribution of powers is an essential 
feature of federalism. Federalism means the distribution of the powers of 
the State among a number of co-ordinate bodies each originating in and 
controlled by the Constitution. 3 The basis or such distribution of powers is 
that in matters of national importance, in which a uniform policy is desirable 
in the interest of the units, authority is entrusted to the Union, and matters of 
local concern remain with the States. 

(2) Supremacy of Constitution. — A federal State derives its existence, from 
the Constitution. Just as a corporation derives its existence from the grant by 
which it is created. Hence, every power, executive, legislative or judicial whe- 
ther it belongs to the cation or to the individual State is subordinate to and 
controlled by the Constitution. 8 The Constitution in a federal State constitutes 
the supreme law of the land. Prof. Wbeare says “that these two institutions— 
the supreme constitution and the written constitution are, then, essential institu- 
tions to a federal Government. The supreme constitution is essential if 
Government is to be federal ; the written constitution is essential if federal 
Government is to work well. 4 5 

(3) A Written Constitution.— A federal constitution must almost necessari- 
ly be a written constitution. The foundations of a federal State are compli- 
cated contracts. It will be practically impossible to maintain the supremacy 
of the Constitution, unless the terms of the constitution have been reduced 
into writing To base an arrangement of this kind upon understandings or 
conventions would be certain to generate misunderstandings and disagreements. 6 * 

(4) Rigidity.— A natural corollary of a written constitution is its rigidity. 
A constitution which is called the supreme law of the land must be rigid also. 
In a rigid Constitution the procedure of amendment is very complicated and 
difficult. This does not mean that the constitution should be legally unalter- 
able. It simply means that the power of amending the Constitution should not 
remain exculusively with either the Central or State Governments. _ A constitu- 
tion of a country is considered to be a permanent document. It is called the 
supreme law of the land. The supremacy of the supreme law of the land can 
only be maintained if the method of amendment is rigid. At the same time it 
requires that a change in it should not become impossible. 

1. Wbeare. K. C. — “Federal Government” 4th Edn. 1963, p. IS. 

2. Dicey, A. V. — The Law of the Constitution (10th Eda.), p. 157. 

3. Ibid at p. 144. 

4. Wheare, K. C. — Federal Government, p. 56, 

5 . “It can be said that a written constitution is not fogicatfy required by the federaf 

principle. The truth seems to be that while it is essential for a federal Government 

that its constitution is supreme to the extent defined above, it is also essential for a 

good federal government that the supreme Constitution be written”,— Prof. K. C. 
Wheare— Federal Government, p. 56. 



2 

Nature of ttie Indian Constitution 

Is the Constitution of India Federal ?— According to the traditional classi- 
fication followed by the political scientists, constitutions are either unitary or 
federal. In a unitary constitution the powers of Government are centralised 
in one Government, viz. the Central Government. The provinces are subordi- 
nate to the Centre. In a federal constitution, on the other hand, there is a 
division of powers between the Centre and the State Governments and both are 
independent in their own spheres. 

There is, however, a difference of opinion amongst the constitutional 
jurists about the nature of the Indian Constitution. One view is that it is a 
quasi-federal constitution and contains more unitary features than federal. 
The other view is that it is a federal constitution with a novel feature adopting 
itself to national emergencies. 

The view of the framers of the Constitution is that the Indian Constitu- 
tion is a Federal Constitution. Dr. Ambedkar, the Chairman of the Drafting 
Committee, has observed thus “I think it is agreed that our Constitution not- 
withstanding the many provisions which are contained in it whereby the Centre 
has been given powers to override the Provinces (States) nonetheless, is a 
Federal Constitution".' Thus, the framers of the Constitution, unanimously 
describe the Indian Constitution, as federal. 

But some constitutional jurists hesitate to characterize the Indian Constitu- 
tion as federal. It is, therefore, necessary to ascertain first what federal 
constitution is and what are its essential characteristics, and then to examine 
whether our Constitution possesses those characteristics. 

Federal Principle—' "By the federal principle”, Prof. Wheare observes, 
“is meant the method of dividing powers, so that the general and regional 
Governments are each within a sphere co-ordinate and independent. Both the 
Federal and the Regional Governments arc co-ordinate and independent 
in their spheres and not subordinate to one another.” 

The American Constitution is universally regarded as an example of 
federal constitution. Tt establishes dual polity or dual form of Government 
/. e. the Federal and the State Governments. The powers of both the Central 
and the State Governments are divided and both are independent in their own 
sphere. The existence of co-ordinate authorities independent of each other is the 
gist of the federal principle. 

Prof. Wheare after giving the definition of what the federal principle is, 
himself starts examining the Constitutions of different countries. He observes : 
“Are we to confine the forms to cases where the federal principle has been 
applied completely and without exception 7 It would not be sensible to do 
this. After all, the Constitution of the United States itself, as originally 
drawn up contained at least one exception to the federal principle in that the 
Senate was composed of representatives selected by the Legislatures of the 
State. Thus a part of the generat Government of the United States was 
dependent to some extent upon a part of the regional Government. This 
exception to the federal principle was maintained in law until 1913. 
Yet the American Constitution from 1787-1913 was and must be called a 
“federal constitution” for the federal principle was predominant in it. That is 

\ C. A. D., Vol. 4, p. 133. Also see C. A. D., Vol. 3, pp. 33-36. 

1. Wheare ; Federal Government, p. 27. Jennings— Some Charactristies of the Indian 
Constitution, p. 1. 


( 18 ) 



21 


NATURE OP THE INDIAN CONS lit UTION 


19 


the criterion. Is the federal prenciplc predominant in the constitution ? If so, 
that constitution may be called a "federal constitution". If, cm the otherhand, 
there are so many modifications in the application of the federal principle 
that it ceases to be of any significance, then the constitution cannot be 
termed as federal. This appears to be the most instructive and responsible 
way in which to use the term ‘federal constitution’. It seems essential to define 
federal principle rigidly, but to apply the term “federal constitution’’ more 
widely. 1 Thus Dr. Wheare accepts that exceptions are permissible provided the 
federal' principle is predominantly retained in the Constitution. 

Essential characteristics of a federal Constitution.— A federal constitution 
usually has the following essential characteristics 

(1) Distribution of Powers.— The distribution of powers is an essentia! 
feature of federalism. Federalism means the distribution of the powers of 
the State among a number of co-ordinate bodies each originating in and 
controlled by the Constitution. 3 The basis of such distribution of powers is 
that in matters of national importance, in which a uniform policy is desirable 
in the interest of the units, authority is entrusted to the Union, and matters of 
local concern remain with the States. 

(2) Supremacy of Constitution.— A federal State derives its existence, from 
the Constitution. Just as a corporation derives its existence from the grant by 
which it is created. Hence, every power, executive, legislative or judicial whe- 
ther it belongs to the nation or to the individual State is subordinate to and 
controlled by the Constitution.* The Constitution in a federal State constitutes 
the supreme law of the land. Prof. Wheare says “that these two institutioos- 
the supreme constitution and the written constitution are, then, essentia! institu- 
tions to a federal Government. The supreme constitution is essential if 
Government is to be federal ; the written constitution is essential if federal 
Government is to work well. 4 

(3) A Written Constitution .—A federal constitution must almost necessari- 
ly be a written constitution. The foundations of a federal State are compli- 
cated contracts. It will be practically impossible to maintain the supremacy 
of the Constitution, unless the terms of the constitution have been reduced 
into writing To base an arrangement of this kind upon understandings or 
conventions would be certain to generate misunderstandings and disagreements • 
(41 Rigidity.- A natural corollary of a written constitution is its rigidity. 
A constitution which is called the supreme law of the land must be rigid also. 
In a rigid Constitution the procedure of amendment is very complicated and 
difficult This does not mean that the constitution should be legally unalter- 
able. It simply means that the power of amending the Constitution should not 
remain exclusively with either the Central or State Governments. A .const, tu- 
tioo of a country is considered to be a permanent document. It “ called the 
suoreme law of the land. The supremacy of the supreme law of th„ land can 
only be maintained if the method of amendment is ngid. At the same tune it 
requires that a change in it should not become impossible. 

t. Ssf&sfs? 1 . 

Wheare— Federal Government, p. 56. 



20 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA [Chap. 

(5) Authority of Courts.— la a federal State the legal supremacy of the 
Constitution is essential for the existence of the federal system. The very nature 
of a federal State involves a division of powers between the Central and State 
Governments under the framework of the Constitution. It is, therefore, 
essential to maintain this division of powers between the two levels of 
Governments. This must be done by some independent aod impartial authority 
above and beyond the ordinary bodies whether federal or State lagislatures 
existing under the constitution. The judiciary has, in a federal polity, the 
final power to interpret the constitution and guard the entrenched provisions 
of the Constitution. 

The Indian Constitution possesses all the essential characteristics of a 
federal constitution mentioned above. The constitution establishes a dual 
polity, a system of double Government with the Central Government at one 
level and the State Government at the other. There is a division of powers 
between the Central and the State Governments Each level of Government is 
supreme in its own sphere. The Constitution of India is written and is 
supreme The provisions of the Constitution which are concerned with federal 
principles cannot be changed without the consent of the majority of States. 
The Constitution establishes a Supreme Court to decide disputes between the 
Union and the States, or the States inter se and interpret finally the provisions 
of the Constitution. 

But, as said earlier, some scholars hesitate to characterise the Indian 
Constitution as truly federal because according to them in certain circumstances 
the Constitution empowers the Centre to interfere in the State matters and 
thus places the States in a subordinate position which is against the federal 
principle. 1 2 They, therefore use such expressions for it as ‘quasi-federal’, ‘unitary 
with federal features’ or ‘federal with unitary features’. In the opoinion of 
Prof, Wheare : 

‘The Constitution establishes a system of Government which is almost 

quasi-federal a unitary State with subsidiary federal features 

rather words than a federal State with subsidiary unitary features. 7 

Jennings has characterised It as ‘a federation with a strong centralising 
tendency’. 3 

Let us now examine what are those provisions of the constitution which 
are produced in support of the above argument and how they modify the strict 
application of the federal principle. In the following matters, it is pointed out, 
that the Indian Constitution contains the modifications of the federal principle : 

(1) Appointment of Governors .— The Governors of the States are appointed 
by the President (Arts. 155 and 156) and arc answerable to him. This is, 
however, not a matter of much significance for the Governor is only the 
constitutional head of the State who shall normally act on the advice of his 
Ministers. There are provisions in the Constitution which require in certain 
matters Central assent to laws passed by State Legislatures to make them valid. 
[Power of the President to veto the State laws reserved for his considera- 
tion— Arts. 286 (3), 288 (2) & 31 (3)]. But whatever be the letter of the Con- 
stitution, in practice there are not many examples where the President has 
vetoed the State Legislature. The only example has been the Kerala Edu- 

1. Instate of W. B.V. Union of India, A. I. R. 1963 S. C. 1241. The Supreme Court 
has held by majority that it it not truly federal However, Subba Rao, J., in his 
dissent treats it basically federal. 

2. Wheare, K. C. — India’s New Constitution Analysed, 1950 A. L. 3, 22. 

3. Jenniogs, Some Characteristics of the Indian Constitution, p. I. 



2 . 


NATURE OP THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION 


21 


cation Bill. 1 But here also the Centre obtained the advisory opinion of the 
Supreme Court before sending it back to the State Legislature for suitable 
amendments in the light of the Court’s opinion. 

(2) Parliamint’s power to legislate in the national interest. — Under Art. 249, 
Parliament is empowered to make laws with respect to every matter enumerat- 
ed in the State List if it is in the national interest. But there cannot beany 
objection to this provision : 

Firstly, no one will deny that if a subject in the State List assumes national 
character, the Parliament should make a law on it. In normal course (bis 
cannot be done unless the Constitution is amended. But in this provision 
we have devised an expedient way by which without formally amending the 
Constitution we can achieve the desired effect, namely, the acquisition by the 
Centre of the power to administer and legislate upon a subject which has 
assumed national importance. 

Secondly, it should also be noted that this power is given to Parliament 
by the Council of States by passing a resolution supported by 2/3rd majority 
of the members present. Thus in effect by this device the Constitution is 
amended by the agreement of majority of the States. We, therefore fail to 
understand how Art. 294 places the States in subordinate position. 

(3) Parliament’s powers to form new States and alteration of boundaries 
of existing States.— The Parliament of India may form new States ; it may 
increase or diminish the area of any State and it may alter the boundaries 
or name of any State (Art. 3). The very existence of the States depends up- 
on the sweet-will of the Union Government. The power conferred on Parlia- 
ment to make territorial adjustment is better explained on the historical basis. 
The Government of India, for the first time, established federal polity in 
India. It deliberately created the constituent units of the federation altho- 
ugh they had no organic roots in the past. The framers of the Canstitutio n 
were well aware of the peculiar conditions under which and the reasons for 
which the States were formed and their boundaries were defined and so they 
deliberately accepted the provisions in Art. 3 with a view to meeting the 
possibility or the rc-distribution of the State territory after the integration 
of Indian States. It may, therefore, be assumed that the provisions in Art. 3 
takes into account the fact that the Constitution contemplated re-adjustment 
of the territories of constituent State and there was no guarantee about their 
territorial integrity. 

(O Emergency provision*— The Constitution envisages three types of emer- 
gency : emergency caused by war or armed rebellion ’ (Art. 352) ; by failure of 
constitutional machinery (Art. 356) ; and financial emergency (Art. 360). When 
the proclamation of emergency is made under Article 352, the normal distribu- 
tion of powers between the Centre and States undergoes a vital change. Parlia- 
ment is empowered to make laws with respect to any matter enumerated in the 
State list. The Centre is empowered to give directions to any State as to the 
manner in which the State’s executive power is to be exercised. Further, the 
President may by order direct that all or any of the provisions of Articles 268 to 
279 relating to distribution of revenue between the Center and the State shall 
take effect with such exceptions or modifications, as he thinks fit. Under Art, 
356, if the President is satisfied that the Government or a State cannot be carried 
on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution he can dismiss the 
State ministry and dissolve the Legislature and assume all the functions of 

t. In re Kerala Education Bill, A. I. R- I 9 SSS.C. 956. 

2. Inserted by the +tth Amendment Act, IW. 



22 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA (Chap. 

the State. Thus the normal distribution of powers between the Centre nod 
the States, which is the basic clement of a federal constitution, is completely 
suspended. U is alleged that these provisions enable the Union Parliament 
to convert the Union into a unitary State which thus vitally changes the federal 
character of the Indian Constitution. 

Do these provisions modify the federal character of the Indian Consti- 
tution ? “The correct view”, observes Dr. V. N. Shukla, "is that the emergency 
provision which come into operation only on the happening of the specific 
contingencies, do not modify or destroy the federal system. It is rather a 
merit of the Constitution that it visualises the contingencies when the strict 
application of the federal principle might destroy the basic assumptions on 
which our Constitution is built. The Constitution by adopting itself to a 
changed circumstance strengthens the Government in its endeavour to over- 
come the crisis. In an emergency the behaviour of each federal Constitution 
is very much different from that in peace time. Though the Constitution of 
the U, S. A., Australia and Canada do not expressly provide for enlargement 
of federal powers during the periods of emergency, but during the two World 
Wars, the defence power of the Federal Government was given so eitended 
an interpretation by the courts that these countries behaved more like unitary 
than federal State. For the above reasons we maintain that the Indian Con- 
stitution is federal in nature. Prof. Whearc has coined a phrase ‘quasi-federa- 
tion* os applicable to India but constitution has nowhere defined what a 
'quasi-federation* is. It is not necessary to use such a vague term ‘quasi- 
federal’ to characterise it. The term ‘quasi-federal* is extremely vague as it does 
not denote how powerful the Centre is, how much deviation there is from the 
pure federal model” or what kind of special position a particular quasl-federa- 
tion occupies between a unitary State and a federation proper. The 
fundamental principle of federation is that the powers are distributed bet- 
ween the Centre and the States and that is done by the Constitution, That 
is wbat the Constitution does. The States do not depend upon the Centre, 
for in normal times the Centre can not Intrude. It may be that the centre 
has been assigned a larger rote than the States, but that by itself does not 
detract from the federal nature of the Constitution for it is not the essence 
of federation to say that only so much, and no more, power is to be given to 
the Centre. 1 2 

Prof.Wheare appears to feel that American Constitution Is truly of 
federal type. He says ‘among example of federal constitutions there may be 
mentioned (hose of the United States, Switzerland and Australia*. 

It may, however, be clearly understood that the nature of federalism is 
more of historical growth based on a nation’s necessity. To accept the same 
pattern of federalism in all countries,*!* well nigh impossible. With all respects 
to Prof. Whearc, we may tell him that federalism varies in form from place to 
place, and from time to time depending on so may factors— historical, 
geographical, economical and political * So what is good for America is not 
necessarily good for India. The people of a country can take in only the 
required dosages, otherwise they may stunt or destroy their growth. Federa- 
lism is not hke the set pattern of coats to wear. It is a cloak of varying 
organised patterns befitting each wearer and helping him to the next and 
superior stages of federalism. India’s federalism is unique and good for itself. 
America’s federalism is not so perfect as it is stated to be. It has got its 


1. M. P. Jain— Indian Contitutional Law. Third Ed., (1978), p. 347 at p. 357. 

2. C. F. Strong— Modern Political Constitutions (1973), p. 87. 



2 ] 


NATUSE OF THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION 


23 


own drawbacks. Indian Constitution is sufficiently federal. It is no less 
federal basically than American federalism which on paper is of a higher 
degree but in actual practice the leaning is towards centralisation of national 
interest. The term ‘quasi’ is a misnomer. India is federal and America is more 
federal in the outline of the Costitution. In practice there is not much differ- 
ence between the two . 1 

It may be that we deviated in respect of certain matters from the strict 
federalism as operating in the U. S A. or Switzerland, but the reasons are 
obvious. The Indian Constitution defined the Indian federal structure not 
with an eye on theoretical or a priori, but on practical considerations under 
the impact of world war, international crisis, scientific and technological pro- 
gress and development of the philosophy of a social welfare state, the whole 
concept of federalism had been undergoing a change for sometime through- 
out the world. There are centralising tendencies in evidence in every federa- 
tion and whether it is in U. S. A. or in Australia, strong and powerful 
National Governments emerged through time. The framers of the Indian 
Constitution took note of these tendencies and kept in view the practical 
needs of the country designed on federal structure not on the footing that it 
should conform to some theoretical, definite or standard pattern, but on 
the basis that it should be able to subserve the need of the country. The 
Indian Costitution, therefore, constitutes a new bold esperiment in the area of 
federalism. 

Conclusion.— la short, it may be said, that the Constitution of ladia is 
neither purely federal nor purely unitary but is a combination of both. It is 
a union of composite state of a novel type. It enshrines the principle that in 
spite of federalism, the national interest ought to be paramount. Thus, the 
Indian Constiution is mainly federal with unique safeguards for enforcing 
national unity and growth . 2 


|. V. O. R»mch»o<lr»n-19SS (S. C. J.J. p.«. 

2 . Jenalngt — Some Ciuncicthtict of lodaa Coniii totion, p. 3i. 



3} 


SALIENT FEATURES 


25 


noted that India’s membership of the Commonwealth of Nations does not in 
any way restrict her sovereignty. India’s membership of the Commonwealth 
is a self-imposed limitation. According to Mr. Ramaswamy “it is a courtesy 
arrangement devoid of any constitutional significance”. Explaining the true 
position of India in the Commonwealth on 10th May, 1949, the then Prime 
Minister, Jawahar Lai Nehru said “we took a pledge long ago to achieve Puma 
Swaraj. We have achieved it. Does a nation loose its independence by an 
alliance with another country ? Alliance normally means mutual commitments. 
The free associations of Sovereign Commonwealth Nations does not involve 
such commitments. It is well known that it is open to any member nation 

to go out of the Commonwealth if it chooses It must be remembered 

that the Commonwealth is not a super-State in any sense of the term. We 
have agreed to consider the king as symbolic head of this free association. 
But the king has no functions attached to that in the Commonwealth. So far 
the Constitution of India is concerned, the king has no place and we shall 
owe no allegiance to him.” 

The term Socialist has been inserted in the Preamble by the Constitution 
42 Amendment Act, 1976. The concept of socialism is ‘however’ implicit in 
ihe Constitution. The Amendment merely spells out clearly this concept i a 
the Preamble. The preamble declares India’s resolve to secure to all its citi- 
zens ‘economic justice’. The framers, however, did not provide for any fixed 
brand of economic justice. It can be established by various ways. The framers 
have therefore left enough room for people of different ways of thinking, 
to achieve the ideal of economic justice in their own way by pursuading the 
electorate that it is best way of achieving economic justice. Dr. Ambedkar 
said, "while we have established political democracy it is also the desire that 
we should lay down as our ideal economic democracy. .. .The question is, 
have we got any fixed idea as to how we should bring about economic democ- 
racy ? There are various ways in which people believe that economic democ- 
racy can be brought about ; there arc those who believe in individualism 
as the best form of economic democracy; there are those who believe in 
having a socialistic state as the best form of economic democracy ; ihere 
are those who believe in the communistic idea as the most perfect form of 
economic democracy. Now, having to the fact that there arc various ways 
by which economic democracy may be brought about, we have deliberately 
introduced in the language that we have used, in the directive principles, 
which is not fixed or rigid, Wc have left enough room for people of different 
ways of thinking, with regard to the reacting of the idea of economic democ- 
racy, to strike in their own way, to persuade the electorates Chat it is the 
best way of reaching economic democracy, the fullest opportunity to act in 
the way in which they want to act.” 1 

The 42nd Amendment now makes it clear thst the nation has choosen 
the path of 'democratic socialism’ to achieve the aforesaid economic democ- 
racy. The word ‘socialism’ has been used in both democratic as well as the 
constitutions of the Communistic countries. It has no definite meaning. In 
general, however, it means a State where the means of production, if not 
wholly, then at least partially, owned and controlled or regulated by the State. 
India has however chosen its own brand of socialism, e. g. mixed-eco- 
nomy. 

The term ‘Secularism* makes it clear that India has no religion of its 
own as recognised religion of State. It treats all religions equally. In a 

I. Ankle 13. 

Cons. 4 



3 

Salient features of the 
Indian Constitution 

1. The lengthiest Constitution in the world. — The Indian Constitution is 
the lengthiest and the most detailed of all the written Constitutions of the wrold. 
It originally consisted of 395 Artic'es divided into 22 Parts and 9 Schedules. 
After the 44th Amendment Act, 1978, the Constitution now consists of 407 
articles divided into 24 Parts and 9 Schedules. This extraordinary bulk of the 
Constitution is due to several reasons : — 

(1) The framers of the Indian Constitution had gained experience from 
the w orking of all the known Constitutions of the world. They were aware of 
the difficulties faced in the working of these Constitutions. This was the reason 
that they sought to incorporate good provisions of those Constitutions in order 
to avoid defects and loopholes that might come in future in the light of those 
Constitutions. Thus, while they framed the Chapter on the Fundamental 
Rights on the model of the American Constitution, and adopted the parlia- 
mentary system of Government from the United Kingdom, they took the idea 
of the Directive Principles of State’s policy from the Constitution of Ireland, 
and added elaborate provisions relating to Emergency in the light of 
the Constitution of the German Reich and the Government of India Act, 1935. 

(2) The Indian Constitution lays down the structure not only of the 
Central Government but also of the States. The American Constitution leaves 
the State to draw up their own Constitutions. 

(3) The vastness of the country and peculiar problems relating to the 
language, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to be solved have also contri- 
buted towards the bulk of the Constitution. 

(4) The Constitution contains a long list of Fundamental Rights and 
also a number of Directive Principles, which confer no justiciable tights upon 
the individual. Though these rights by their very nature could not be made 
legally enforceable yet the makers sought to incorporate them in the Constitution 
which would serve as the moral restraint upon future governments to imple- 
ment the ideals cherished by the framers to be achieved by a welfare state as 
envisaged in the Constitution. It was also felt that the smooth working of an 
infant democracy might be jeopardised unless the Constitution mentioned in 
detail things which were left in other Constitutions to ordinary legislation. 
This explains why we have in our Constitution detailed provisions about the 
organisation of the judiciary, the services, the Public Service Commissions, 
Elections and many transitory provisions and the like.’ 

Establishment of a Sovereign, Socialist, Secular, 9 Democratic Republic.— 
The Preamble of the Constitution declares India to be a Sovereign, Socialist, 
Secular, Democratic Republic. The word Sovereign emphasises that India is 
no more dependent upon any outside authority. Its membership of the Com- 
monwealth of Nations and that of the United Nations Organisation do not 
restrict her sovereignty. Critics say that India’s membership of the Common- 
wealth of Nations is not compatible with her sovereign status. But it is to be 

1. Constitution Assembly Debates, Vol. XI.pp. 839-840. 

2. Added by the 42nd Amendment Act, 1976. 

C 24 ) 



3] 


SALIENT FEATURES 


27 

(b) that matters which should have been left to ordinary legislation 
having been incorporated into the Constitution and no change in these 
matters is possible without undergoing the process of amendment. 

5. Fundamental Rights. — -The incorporation of a formal declaration of 
Fundamental Rights in Part III of the Constitution is deemed to be a dis- 
tinguishing feature of a democratic State. These rights are prohibitions against 
the State. The State cannot make a law which takes away or abridges any of 
the rights of the citizens guaranteed in Part III of the Constitution. If it 
passes such a law it may be declared unconstitutional by the courts. But mere 
declaration of certain fundamental rights will be of no use if there is no machi- 
nery for their enforcement- Our Constitution has, therefore, conferred on the 
Supreme Court the power to grant most effective remedies in the nature of 
writs of Habeas Corpus, Mandamus, Prohibition, Quo Warranto and Certiorari, 
whenever such rights are violated. 

It must, however, be clearly understood that fundamental rights arc not 
absolute rights. They are subject to certain restrictions. Thus our Constitution 
tries to strike a balance between the individual liberty and the social interest. The 
idea of incorporating a Bill of Rights has been taken from the Constitution of 
the United States. But the guarantee of individual rights in our Constitution 
has been very carefully balanced with the need for security of the State itself.* 

The 42nd Amendment Act, 1976. makes it clear that the social interest is 
supreme. It gives precedence to the directives over the fundamental rights. 

6. Directive Principles of State Policy.— The Directive Principles of 
State Policy contained in Part IV of the Constitution set out the aims and 
objectives to be taken up by the States in the governance of the country. 
Unlike the Fundamental Rights, these rights are not justiciable. If the State 
Is unable to implement any provisions of Part IV, no action can be brought 
against the State in a law court. For this want of enforceability there has 
been much criticism. But the crititcism is not justified. Though by their very 
nature they arc not justiciable in the court of law, the State authorities have to 
answer for them to the electorate at the time of election. The idea of a welfare 
State envisaged in our Constitution can only be achieved if the States 
endeavour to implement them with a high sense or moral duty. 

The Constitution 25th Amendment, 1971 and the 42nd Amendment, 1976 
have enhanced the importance of the directive principles ris-a-vls fundamental 
rights They have ctven precedence to the directive principles over the 
fundamental rights, 'in case of conflict between the directives and fundamental 
rights, the courts shall now be under a duty, notwithstanding its enforceability, 
to give effect to the former. 

7. A Federation with strong centralising tendency. — The most remarkable 
feature" or the Indian Constitution is that being a federal Constitution it 
acquires a unitary character during the time of emergency. Daring the 
proclamation of emergency the normal distribution of powers between the 
Centre and the States undergoes a vital change. The Union Parliament is 
empowered to legislate on any subjects mentioned in the State List. The Cen- 
tralGovernment is empowered to give directions to Stales as to the manner in 
which it should esercise its eiccntive powers. The financial arrangements 
between the Centre and State can also be altered by the Union Government. 
Thus during the proclamation of emergency all powers arc centralised in the 


I. CerMitocnt AvewMy TVHte, Vet VI, re- 591-VJ. 



26 CONStltUTlONAL LAW OF >Nb|A [Chap. 

Secular Stale the State regulates the relation between man and man. It is 
not concerned with the relation of man with God. 

The term ‘democratic' indicates that the Constitution has established a 
form of Government which gets its authority from the will of the people, 
Thetulersarc elected by the people and are responsible to them. Justice, 
Liberty, Equality and Fraternity which ore the essential characteristics of a 
democracy are declared in the Preamble of the Constitution as the very objec- 
tives of the Constitution. 

The term ‘Republic* signifies that there shall be an elected head of the 
State who will be the chief executive head. The President of India, unlike the 
British King, is not a hereditary monarch but an elected person chosen for a 
limited period. It is an essential ingredient of a Republic. 

2. Sorerelgnty resides (n the people.— The Preamble of the Constitution 
declares that the Constitution of India is adopted and enacted by the people 
of India and they are the ultimate master of the Republic. Thus the 
real power is in bands of the people of India, both in the Union and in the 
States. 

3. Parliamentary form of Government.—' The Constitution of India estab- 
lishes a parliamentary form of Government both at the Centre and the 
States. In this respect the makers of the Constitution have followed the 
British model in toto. The reason for this is that we were accustomed to 
this type of Government. The essence of the Parliamentary form of Govern- 
ment is its responsibility to the Legislature. The President is the constitu- 
tional head of the State. The real executive power is vested in the Council 
of Ministers whose head is the Prime Minister. The Council of Ministers 
is collectively responsible to the Lower House, e. g. Lok Sabha. 
The members of the Lower House are elected directly by the people on 
the basis of adult franchise normally for five years. The position is the 
same in the States. This Government is, therefore, called a responsible 
Government. On the other hand, the American Constitution establishes a 
Presidential type of Government based on tbe principle of separation of 
powers. The President is the real executive ; elected directly by the people 
for 4 years. All executive powers are vested in him. He is not responsible 
to the Lower House, e. g. the Congress. The members of his Cabinet are 
not members of the Legislature. They are appointed by the President and 
therefore responsible to him. 

4. Unique blend of rigidity and flexibility.— R has been the nature of the 
amending process itself in federations which had led political scientists to 
classify federal constitution as rigid.* A ligid constitution is onewbicti requires 
a special method of amendment of any of its provisions while in a flexible 
constitution any of its provisions can be amended by ordinary legislative pro- 
cess. A written constitution is generally said to be rigid. The Indian Cons- 
titution, though written, is sufficiently flexible, h is only a few provisions of 
the Constitution that require the consent of half of the State legislatures. 
The rest of the provisions can be amended by a special majority of the Parlia- 
ment. The fact that the Indian Constitution has been amended 45 times during 
the 30 years of its working disapproves the view taken by Sir Ivor Jennings 
who had characterized our Constitution as rigidfor the following reasons 

(a) that the process of amendment was complicated and difficult ; 

1. Whe*rt, K. C. — Federal Government, p. 209. 



3 ] 


SALIENT FEATURES 


27 


(b) that matters which should have been left to ordinary legislation 
having been incorporated into the Constitution and no change in these 
matters is possible without undergoing the process of amendment. 

5. Fundamental Rights. — The incorporation of a formal declaration of 
Fundamental Rights in .Part III of the Constitution is deemed to be a dis- 
tinguishing feature of a democratic State. These rights are prohibitions against 
the State. The State cannot make a law which takes away or abridges any of 
the rights of the citizens guaranteed in Part III of the Constitution. If it 
passes such a law it may be declared unconstitutional by the courts. But mere 
declaration of certain fundamental rights will be of no use if there is no machi- 
nery for their enforcement. Our Constitution has, therefore, conferred on the 
Supreme Court the power to gram most effective remedies in the nature of 
writs of Habeas Corpus, Mandamus, Prohibition, Quo Warranto and Certiorari, 
whenever such rights are violated. 

It must, however, be clearly understood that fundamental rights arc not 
absolute rights. They are subject to certain restrictions. Thus our Constitution 
tries to strike a balance between the individual liberty and the social interest. The 
idea of incorporating a Bill of Rights has been taken from the Constitution of 
the United States. But the guarantee of individual rights in our Constitution 
has been very carefully balanced with the need for security of the State itself. 1 

The 42nd Amendment Act, 1976, makes it clear that the social interest is 
supreme. It gives precedence to the directives over the fundamental rights. 

6. Directive Principles of State Policy.— The Directive Principles of 
State Policy contained in Part IV of the Constitution set out the aims and 
objectives to be taken up by the States in the governance of the country. 
Unlike the Fundamental Rights, these rights are not justiciable. If the State 
is unable to implement any provisions of Part IV, no action can be brought 
against the State in a law court. For this want of enforceability there has 
been much criticism. But the crititcism is not justified. Though by their very 
nature they arc not justiciable in the court of law, the State authorities have to 
answer for them to the electorate at the time of election. The idea of a welfare 
State envisaged in our Constitution can only be achieved if the States 
endeavour to implement them with a high sense of moral duty. 

The Constitution 25th Amendment, 1971 and the 42nd Amendment, 1976 
have enhanced the importance of the directive principles vis-a-vis fundamental 
rights They have given precedence to the directive principles over the 
fundamental rights. In case of conflict between the directives and fundamental 
rights, the courts shall now be under a duty, notwithstanding its enforceability, 
to give effect to the former. 

7, A Federation with strong centralising tendency.— The roost remarkable 
feature of the Indian Constitution is that being a federal Constitution it 
acquires a unitary character during the time of emergency. During the 
proclamation of emergency the normal distribution of powers between the 
Centre and the States undergoes a vital change. The Union Parliament is 
empowered to legislate on any subjects mentioned in the State List. The Cen- 
tral Government is empowered to give directions to States as to the manner in 
which it should exercise its executive powers. The financial arrangements 
between the Centre and State can also be altered by the Union Government 
Thus during the proclamation of emergency alt powers are centralised in the 

|. Constituent A wembly Dthate, Vol. VI, PT- S7WS. 



28 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


fCbap. 


Union Government and Constitution acquires a unitary character. This does 
not happen only during the emergency. Even in times of peace our Constitu- 
tion functions as unitary. 


This combination of federal and unitary system is a unique feature of the 
Indian Constitution. It is not only in times of war but also in times of peace 
that our Constitution functions as unitary. This feature of the Constitution 
can be better understood in the historical background upon which the 
federalism has been introduced in India and also in the light of the experience 
in other federal countries. 


8. Adult Suffrage— The old system of communal electorates has been 
abolished and the unilateral adult suffrage system has been adopted. Under 
the Indian Constitution every man, woman above 21 years of age has been 
given the right to elect reprsentatives for the legislature. The adoption of 
the universal Adult Suffrage (Art. 326) without any qualification either of sex, 
property, taxation, or the like is a ‘bold experiment' in India, having regard to 
the vast extent of the country and its population, with an overwhelming 
illiteracy. This suffrage is wider than all the democratic countries which have 
given right of vote to their people. In spite of many difficulties, this bold 
experiment has been crowned with success. This is evident with the 
increased number of voters on the electoral rolls in the general elections. 


9. An Independent Judiciary.— Mere enumeration of a number of funda- 
mental rights in a Constitution without aoy provision for their proper safe- 
guards will not serve any useful purpose. Indeed, the very existence of a right 
depends upon the remedy for its enforcement. Unless there is remedy there is no 
right, goes a famous maxim. For this purpose, an independent and impartial 
judiciary, with a power of judicial review has been established under the 
Constitution of India. It is the custodian of the rights of citizens. Besides, in 
a federal Constitution it plays another significant role of deteimining the limits 
of power of the Centre and States. 


10. A Secular State. — A Secular State has no religion of its own as recog- 
nised religion of State. It treats all religions equally. The Preamble declares 
the resolve of the people of India to secure to all its citizens "liberty of 

belief, faith and worship.” Articles 25 to 28 of the Constitution give 

concrete shape to this concept of secularism. It guarantees to every person the 
freedom of conscience and the right to profess, practise and propagate religion. 
In a secular State the State only regulates Ihe relationship between man and 
roan. It is not concerned with the relation of man with God. One may 
worship God according to the dictates of bis own conscience. 

It is to he however noted that the freedom of religion is not an absolute 
freedom, but subject to the regulatory power of the State. I n the name of 
religion nothing can be done which is against public order, morality and health 
of the public. Secularism is also subject to 'democratic socialism' Religious 
freedom cannot therefore be used to practise economic exploitation’ The right 
to acquire, own and administer property by religious institutions is subject to 
the regulatory power of the State. J 


11. Fundamental Duties —The Constitution (42 Amendment) Act, 1976. 
has introduced a code of ten ‘Fundamental Duties” for citizens. The funda- 
mental duties are intended to serve as a constant reminder to every citizen what 
the Constitution _ specifically conferred on them certain fundamental rishts 
it also requires citizens to observe certain basic norms of democractic conduct’ 
and democratic behaviour. * 



4 


The Preamble of the 
Constitution 

The Preamble to an Act sets out the main objectives which the legisla- 
tion is intended to achieve. 1 ll is a sort of introduction to the statute and in 
many a times very helpful to understand the policy and legislative intent. It 
expresses “what we bad thought or dreamt for so long.” 2 The Constitution 
makers gave to the Preamble ‘the pride of place’. It embodies in a solemn 
form all the ideals and aspirations for which the country had struggled during 
the British regime. 3 In re Berubari case* the Supreme Court has said, the 
Preamble to the Constitution is a key to open the mind of the makers, and 
shows the general purpose for which they made the several provisions in the 
Constitution. In a ‘nutshell’ the Preamble contains "the ideals and aspirations 
of the people of India.” 

The Preamble of the Indian Constitution says : 

“We, the People of India, having solemnly resolved to constitute India 
into a “Sovereign {Socialist Secular!* Democratic Republic and to secure to 
all citizens : 

Justice, Social, economic and political ; 

Liberty, of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship ; 

Equality, of status and of opprtunity and to promote among them 

all ; 

Fraternity assuring dignity of the individual and the unity {and integri- 
ty] 6 of the nation ; 

In our Constituent Assembly this Twenty-sixth day of Nov., 1949 do 
Hereby Adopt, Enact and Give to ourselves this Constitution.” 

Preamble how far useful in interpreting the Constitution. — The Preamble 
is the key to open tbe mind of the makers. But it does not mean that the 
preamble is to override tbe express provisions of the Act. In Berubari’s 
case the Supreme Court had held that the Preamble is not a part of the Cons- 
titution and therefore it has never been regarded as the source of any substan- 
tive powers. Such powers are expressly granted in the body of the Constitu- 
tion What is true about the powers is equally true about the prohibitions. 

It bas limited application and can be resorted to where there is any ambiguity 
in the statute, if the term used in the Constitution are ambiguous or capable 
of two meanings’ in interpreting them some assistance may be taken from the 
objectives enshrined in the Constitution and the construction which fits the 
preamble may be preferred. 

t. Subba Rao, C. J. lu L. C. Golak Nath v. State of Punjab, A- I. R. 1967 S. C. IMS. 

2. Sir Altadi Ktishnaswami : Constituent Assembly Debates. Vol. 10, p. 417. 

3 Shetat and Grover, JJ., in Ketavanand Rharli’s cate, A. I. R 197} S. C. MSI. 

4. A. 1.R.1960S. C. 84J. 

5. Inserted by the 42nd Amendment. 1976. 



30 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA [Chap, 

But in Kesvananda Bhartt's case 3 the Supreme Court has rejected the 
above view and held that the preamble is the part of the Constitution. Though 
in an ordinary statute not much importance is attached to the preamble 
all importance has to be attached to the preamble in interpreting the Cons- 
titution. 1 2 Sikri, C. J. has further observed ’‘no authority has been referred 
before us to establish the propositions that what is true about the powers is 
equally true about the prohibitions and limitations. Even from the Preamble 
limitations have been derived in some cases. . . . It seems to me that the Preamble 
of our Constitution ts. of extreme Importance and the Constitution should be 
read and interpreted in the light of the grand and nobie vbion expressed in the 
Preamble.” 3 

The purpose it serves.— The Preamble serves the following purposes : 

(a) It indicates the source from which the Constitution comes, viz. the 
people of India. 

(b) It contains the enacting clause which brings into force of the Cons- 
titution. 

(c) It declares the great rights and freedoms which the people of India 
intended to secure to all citizens and the basic type of Government and 
polity which was to be established as it has been explained in the preceding 
Chapter. 4 * 

It is ordained by the people of India through their representatives assem- 
bled in a sovereign Constituent Assembly. The preamble declares in unambi- 
guous terms that it is the people of India who have adopted, enacted and given 
to themselves this Constitution. It declares, therefore, that the source of autho- 
rity under the Constitution is the people of India and there is no subordination to 
any external authority. 

The Preamble of the Constitution declares India to be a ‘Sovereign 
Socialist, Secular, 6 Democratic Republic.’ ‘Sovereign power’ is that which is 
absolute and uncontrolled. In the words of Cooley, “A State is sovereign 
where there resides within itself a supreme and absolute power acknowledging 
no superior." The word ‘sovereign’ emphasizes that India is no more depen- 
dent upon any outside authority. However, India is still a member of the 
Commonwealth of Nations. But as it has been explained in the preceding 
Chapter, her membership of the Commonwealth of Nations is not inconsistent 
with her independent sovereign status. 

In a democratic State, it may hare an elected or a hereditary head.— It is 
‘republic’ because the head of the State is not a hereditary monarch In a 
•republic’ the political sovereignty vests in the people and the head of the Slate 
is only a person elected by the people for a fixed term. In our Constitution 
there js a President who is the head of the Executive and who is elected, as 
opposed to hereditary monarch, and holds office for a fixed term of five years. 
The terra 'democratic’ indicates that the Constitution has established a form of 
Government which gets its authority from the will or the people. The rulers are 
elected by the people and are responsible to them The democratic set up can 

1. AIR 1973 SC 1461. 

2. Sir Alladi Krishnaswami : Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. 10, 4t7. 

3. Supra Note I . 

4. Kesavaoand Bharti v. State of Kerata, A. I. R. 1973 S. C. 1461. 

5- Inserted by the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976. 



4 ] 


THE PREAMBLE OF TUB CONSTITUTION 


31 


be of two types : (i) Direct, (ii) indirect. In a direct democracy the legal and 
political sovereignty vests in the people, as is the case in Switzerland. In the 
indirect system of Democracy, it is the representatives of the people who 
exercise the power of legal as well as political sovereignty. The electorate 
choose their representatives who carry on the Government. It is for this reason 
that this type of democracy is called representative democracy. 

In the Indian Constitution we have adopted indirect or representative 
system of democracy. All the adults above the age of 21 years have a right to 
vote. 

The term 'democracy’ in its broadest sense embraces, in addition to poli- 
tical democracy, also social and economic democracy. The term ‘democratic* 
is used in this very sense in the Preamble. 

Objectives enshrined in the Preamble. — The following are the objectives 
which the Preamble secures to every citizen : 

Justice.— Social, economic and political. 

Liberty. — Of thought, expression, faith and worship ; 

Equality.— Of status and opportunity, 
and to promote among them all. 

Fraternity.— Assuring the dignity of the individual and the ‘[unity and 
integrity) of the Nation. 

Democracy would indeed be hollow if it fails to generate this spirit of 
brotherhood among all sections of the people — ‘a feeling that they are 
all children of the same soil, the same motherland. It becomes all the more 
essential in a country like India composed of many races, rilegions, languages 
and of culture.’* Article I of the Declaration of Human Rights adopted by 
the U. N. O. embodies this noble and human principle that “all the human 
beings arc born free and in equal dignity and rights, they are endowed with 
reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of 
brotherhood.” It is this concept of brotherhood of man which is contained 
in the Preamble of the Constitution and is given practical shape by abolisbiag 
title (Art. 18) and untouchability (Art. 17) and many other social evils 
which swayed the social arena of Indian society.* Liberty, Equality and 
Fraternity which the Constitution seeks to secure for the people of India is 
to serve the primary objective of ensuring social, economic and political justice. 
Justice is the harmonious blending of selfish nature of man and the good of the 
society. The attainment of the collective good as distinguished from individual 
good is the main aim of rendering justice. Combining the ideals of political, 
social, economic democracy with that of equality and fraternity, the Preamble, 
Gandbiji described as “The India of My Dreams”, namely — “an India, in 
which the poorest shall feel that it is their country in whose making they 
have an effective voice ; an India in which all communities shall live in perfect 
harmony.” 1 2 3 4 

Can Preamble be amended nndcr Article 368.— This question was raised 
for the first time before the Supreme Court in the historic case of Kesavanond v. 
State of Kerala .* On behalf of the Union and tbe States it was argued that by 

1. Inserted by the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act. 1976. 

2. Basu— Introduction to the Constitution of India. 3rd Ed , 1954. p. 23. 

3. Buckingham & Carnatic Co. Ltd. v. Venlatiah. A. I. R. 1964 S. C. 1272. 

4. M. K. Gandhi— India of My Dreams, pp. 9-10 

3. A. I. R. 1973 S. C. 1461. 



32 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INUIA [Chap. 

virtue of the amending power in Article 368 even the Preamble can be varied, 
altered or repealed. It was said that the Preamble is a part of the Constitution 
and therefore it can be amended like any other provisions of the Constitution. 
The petitioners, on the other hand, contended that the amending power in 
Article 368 is limited. Preamble creates an implied limitation on the power 
of amendment. The Preamble contains the basic elements or the fundamental 
features of our Constitution. Amending power cannot be used so as to destroy 
or damage these basic features mentioned in the Preamble. It was urged that 
the preamble cannot be amended as preamble is not a part of the Constitution. 

The majority held that the Preamble is a part of the Constitution. The 
Court said that the earlier view as expressed in the Re Berubarl case that 
preamble is not part of the statute is not correct. This view is in accord with 
modern authorities who consider the Preamble a part of the statute. 1 

On the question whether the preamble can be amended, six judges (flay, 
Pdlekar, Mathew, Beg, D vivedi, Chandrachud , JJ.), held that it can be amended. 
Shelat, Grover, Reddy, JJ., expressly held that the preamble cannot be amended. 
Three Judges, the Chief Justice Slkri. Hegde and Mukherjee, JJ., did not 
express any clear opinion on the point. Tbe Chief Justice, however, said that 
since Parliament had not chosen to amend the preamble it is not necessary to 
express any opinion on this point. However, all the three judges held that the 
basic element or fundamental features of the Constitution mentioned in the 
preamble of tbe Constitution cannot be destroyed or damaged under the 
amending power. Tbe Chief Justice said that the preamble of our Constitution 
is of extreme importance and the Constitution should be read and inter- 
preted in the light of the grand and noble vision expressed in the Pre- 
amble. Khanna, J., held “as preamble is a part of the Constitution its provisions 
other than those relating to basic structure or framework are as much 
subject to the mandatory powers contained in Article 368 as other parts of 
the Constitution." 

The majority thus favoured the view that the preamble cannot be amended 
or at least that part of it which relates to the basic structure or framework 
cannot be destroyed or damaged. In this respect it would be pertinent to refer 
the observations made by Shelat and Grover, JJ. They said. “The stand taken 
by the respondents that even the preamble can be amended under Article 3.8 
is an extraordinary one. It may be true about ordinary statutes but it cannot 
be the subject in the light of the historical background, the objectives resolution 
which formed the basis of the preamble and the fundamental position which 
the preamble occupies in our Constitution. It constitutes a landmark in 
India's history and sets out as a matter of historical fact what the people of 
India resolved to do for moulding their destiny.” 

The edifice of our Constitution is based upon the basic elements mention- 
ed in the preamble. If any of these elements arc removed the structure will 
not survive and it will not be the same Constitution or it cannot maintain its 
identity. The preamble declares that the people of India resolved to cons- 
titute their country into a Sovereign Democratic Republic. No one can 
surest that these words and cipiessioDS are ambiguous in any manner. An 
amending power be interpreted so as to confer power on the Parliament to 
take away any of these fundamental and basic characteristic of our policy ? 
Can it be said or even suggested that the amending body can make institution 

I. Craits on Statute Law, 6th Ed., p. 200 ; see also H. M. Semi's Constitutional Law of 

India, 1967 Ed., p. 75. 



4) 


TUB PREAMBLE OP fRB CON5TITUIION 


33 


created by our Constitution undemocratic as opposed to democratic ; or 
abolish the office of the President and instead have some other head of the 
State who would not fit into the conception of a Republic 1 The width of 
amending power claimed on behalf of the respondents has such a large dimen- 
sion that even the above part of the preamble can be wiped out from which it 
would follow that India can cease to be a sovereign Democratic Republic. 

It is submitted that the view that the basic dements in the Preamble 
cannot be destroyed or damaged under amending power is correct. The 
amending power cannot change the Constitution in such a way that it ceases 
to be a ‘sovereign democratic Republic.’ It can only be done by wrecking the 
Constitution. 

42nd Amendment, 1976 and the Preamble. — This Amendment has inserted 
three new words in' the Preamble, i. e. Secularism, Socialism and Integrity. 
These concepts are implicit in the Constitution. The Amendment merely 
spells out clearly these concepts in the Preamble. 

* Socialism ’ is implicit in the preamble and the directive principle of the 
Constitution. The term "economic justice” in the Preamble denotes nothing 
but India’s resolve to briog socio-economic revolution. ‘The Directive Princi- 
ples’ particularly Art. 39 of the Constitution, are Charters of social and econo- 
mic liberties of the people. 

The word 'socialism' has, however, no definite meaning. It has been 
invariably used in both the types of Constitutions— democratic and com- 
munistic. Generally, the term implies a system of government in which the 
means of production is wholly or partially controlled by the State. 

India’s socialism is, however, a democratic socialism and not a 'com- 
munistic socialism’. For this purpose, the Preamble has combined both the 
words Socialism and Democracy in the Preamble. 

This combination of the words, socialism and the democracy have been 
criticised by many writers. It has been said that democracy and socialism 
cannot co-exist. This criticism is. however, not justified in view of the 
gradual change of thinking in the modern socialists. Their thinking is in line 
with the idea of a welfare state which would prevent only the excess of exploi- 
tation and free competition without destroying individual initiative and 
without detriment to the political freedoms. It is. thus, marriage of democracy 
and socialism which has been embedded in the Indian Constitution. 1 

The word ’’integrity" is intended to put an end to separatist tendencies 
and make people feel that every part of India is their home. This concept 
is implicit in the nature of the Federation envisaged by the Indian Constitution. 
The framers have used the word "India shall be a Union of States’* in Art. I 
of the Constitution with a view to make it clear that the iStates have no right 
to secede from the federation. In addition to this. Art. 19 empowers the 
State to impose reasonable restrictions on the freedom of speech and expres- 
sion of citizens in the interests of integrity and sovereignty of India. This 
freedom cannot be allowed to endanger the integrity or*sovereignty of India 
or to allow citizens to preach secession of any part of fndia from the Union. 

In view of these provisions in the Constitution, it is difficult to understand 
why this new word has been included io the Constitution. The Preamble is 

I. Desbpiode. V. S. : Riehti tod Dotxs under the tnJian Con Ui( niton, (IStJLLI 197J, 
p. 94. Also tec Excel Weir w. Union of India, AIR 1979 SC 2S — HTect of Ibe »ord 
•Socialism' his been considered by ibe Court. 

Cons. 5 



34 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA [Chap. 

not the source of power and cannot control the written words of the 
Constitution. 

'Secularism' means a State which docs not recognise any religion as a 
State's religion. It treats all religions equally. The Preamble declares the 

resolve of the people of India to secure to all its citizens “liberty of belief, 

faith and worship”, further. Articles 25 to 28 of the Constitution guarantee 
to every person the freedom of conscience and the right to profess, practise 
and propagate religion. In the recent case of St. Xavier e College v. State 
of Gujarat ,* the Supreme Court has observed, “although the words 'secular 
State' arc not expressly mentioned in the Constitution but there can be no 
doubt that our Constitution-makers wanted to establish such a State" and 
accordingly. Articles 23 to 2$ have been included in the Constitution. 

The 42nd Amendment removes the doubt about the amendability of the 
Preamble as expressed in the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of 
Keshavanand Dhartl v. State of Kerala. Jn that case, the Court had held that 
the part which related to the basic features in the preamble cannot be amend* 
cd. This amendment males it clear that the preamble is the part of the 
Constitution and therefore like other provisions of the Constitution, subject 
to the amending power of the Parliament. 


t. AIR 1974 SC 1389. 



5 

The Union and its Territory 
(Arts. 1—4) 


Union of States. — Article I of the Constitution declares that the sovereign 
democratic Republic of India “shall be the Union of Stales’’. The choice for 
a federation with a strong centre was made both for political and administra- 
tive reasons allhough the move to describe the Constitution as federal failed. 
The Constituent Assembly accepted the view of the Drafting Committee that 
describing the Union as Federation was not necessary.* While submitting the 
Draft Constitution Dr. Arabedkar, the Chairman of the Drafting Committee 
stated that “although its constitution may be federal in structure”, the Com- 
mittee had used the terra "Union” because of certain advantages.* These 
advantages, as explained in the Constituent Assembly, indicate two things (a) 
that the Union of India is not result of an agreement among the units like the 
American Federation, consequently (b) the States have no right to secede from 
the federation. Dr. Ambedkar explained the purpose of the word ‘Union* thus : 

^.though India was to be a federation, the Federation was not the result of 
an agreement by the Siates to join in a Federation and that the Federation not 
being the result of 3n agreement, no State has the right to secede from it. The 
federation is a Union because it is indestructible. Though the country and the 
people can be divided into different States for convenience of administration, 
the country is an integral whole, its people, a single people living under single 
imperium derived from a singtc source The Americans had to wage a civil 
war to establish that the States have no right to cession and that better Federa- 
tion was indestructible. The Drafting Committee thought that it was better to 
make it clear at the outset, rather than to leave it to speculation.” 3 

The name of the Union is India or Bharat. The members of the Union 
at present arc the States specified in the First Schedule. 

Territory of India.— The territory of India falls under three categories : 

(1) State territories ; 

(2) Union territories ; and 

(3) Territories which may be acquired by Government of India. 

Before the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)* Act, 1956, the Union con- 
sisted of States which were classified into four main categories —Pans A, B, C 
and D of the First Schedule. Thus at the time of the commencement of the 
Constitution, the Union of India consisted of 10 Part A States, 8 Part B States, 

9 Part C States and I Part D State. 

The Constitution ( 7th Amendment) Act, 1956, abolished the three categories 
and placed all the States of the Union on the same footing as a result of 
re-organization made by the State Re-organization Act, 1956. It has reduced 
these categories into two only. The territory of India at present consists of the 
following : 


1, See i be Duhift* Coalmines’* footnote on p. 2 of the Drift to thefo'.towle* effect: 
**Ibe Drifting Con-nli tee com I den that following the tinrjjpr of the Ormsti North 

American Act, 1867. M would not K inipproprtate to describe India » Union 
although it* Conjittutlcwruf be federal fat struct uie, C^A.L).. VII, pp. 6. Jr#, 400. 

2. Draft Constitution. 21 2- 19*S. r. 4. 

J. Cemstitutnt Assembly Debatt*. >oL 7, p. 41. 

4. Amendment in Art. I ©f lb* Constitution. ^ 



36 


CONSTHUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 

UNION 


[Chap. 


States 


1 


Union Territories 
~2 


Other Territories 
as may be 
• acquired 

3 


1. Andhra Pradesh 

2. Assam 

3. Bihar 

4. Gujarat 

5 . Ketala 

6. Madhya Pradesh 

7. Tamil Nadu (Madras) 

8. Maharashtra' 

9. Karnatak* 

10. Orissa 
It. Punjab 

12. Rajasthan 

13. Uttar Pradesh 

14. West Bengal 

15. Jammu & Kashmir 

16. Nagaland* 

17. Haryana* 

18. Himachal Pradesh 

19. Manipur' 

20. Tripura* 

21. Meghalaya 1 

22. Sikkim 8 


1. Delhi 

2. The Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands 

3. Lakshadweep 18 

4. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 4 

5. Pondicherry* 

6. Goa. Daman and Diu* 

7. Chandigarh 

8. Mizoram 1 

9. Arunachal Pradesh' 


The Union territories mentioned above are centrally administered are , 
to be governed by the President acting through an Administrator appointed y 
him unless Parliament provides otherwise. The President may appoint in 
Governor of a State as the administrator of an adjoining Union territory. » 


J. Subs, for Bombay by the Bombay Reorganization Act, I960. 

2. Inserted by the State of Nayaliod Act. 1962. 

J. Inserted by the Punjab Reorganization Act. 1966. 

4. Inserted by tbe Constitution (Tenth Amendment) Act, 1961. 

« Insetted by the Constitution (T» etflh Amendment) Act. 1962. 
k insetted by the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1963. 

1 Inserted by Act SI of 1971. See also the Constitution (27th Amendment) Act .1971. 

' . jjeJ by the Constitution (?6ih Amendment) Act. 197*. 

o Subs- vile G. S. R. *n (E). dated WO-1973 (». e. r. 1-1 1-197 Jv 
in’ Tbe laccadiee. MiniKyjJ»dAnuadm Islands (Alteration of Names) Act No. J4 of 
19731*-*- 1 - 1 ' 11 • - 



5] 


THE UNION AND IIS TERRITORY 


37 


that capacity a Governor shall exercise his functions independently of the 
Council of Ministers (Art. 239 (1)]. 

Any territory which may at any time be acquired by India will be includ- 
ed in the difinition of Union territories. The power to acquire new territories 
is an attribute of sovereignty. For this, no parliamentary legislation is 
required. The usual modes of acquisition of territory by a State arc cession, 
occupation, subjugation, acquisition, prescription, accretion and conquest. 
Thus, foreign territories acquired by India may be admitted into the Union 
as a new State under Art. 2 or may be merged into an existing State under 
Art. (3) (a) or 3 (b). 

Admission or establishment of New States.— Article 2 provides that 
Parliament may admit into the Union or establish new States on such terms 
and conditions as it thinks fit. Articfe 2 thus gives Parliament two powers, 
fitstly, to admit into the Union new States, and secondly, the power to establish 
new States. The first refers to the admission of States which are duly formed 
and established and are already in existence. The second refers to the admis- 
sion and formation of a State which was not In existence before. It is to be 
noted that Article 2 deals with admission or establishment of new States into 
the Union of India which may be formed of the territories not included in the 
existing States. 

It is worth noticing that the admission or establishment of a new State 
will be ‘on such terms and conditions as Parliament may think fit.' Here again 
our Constitution differs from the American and Australian Constitutions which 
accept the theory of equality of States. Each State in America sends equal 
number of representatives in the Seoate. The principle of equality applies even 
to the new States admitted by the Congress in the Union. 1 2 3 Also, no re-adjust- 
ment of the boundaries of the States of the Union can be done without 
the consent of the Legislatures of the States concerned as well as of the 
Congress. 0 


It h3S already been pointed out that the American federation is the result 
of an agreement between various constituent independent States. It is there- 
fore obvious that the agreement cannot be altered without the consent of 
Legislatures of those States. But the Indian federation is not the result of any 
agreement between independent States. None of the constituent units of • 
Indian Union were sovereign and independent in the sense the American colo- 
nics were before they federated. There is no provision in the Indian Consti- 
tution which gives a right to a new State, after its admission into the Union 
of India to claim complete equality or status with a State existing at the 
commencement of the Constitution or formed thereafter under Article 3 of 
the Constitution. In India, Article 2 gives complete discretion to Parliament 
to admit or establish new States on such terms and conditions as “it 
thinks fit”. 

After a new Slate is admitted or the boundaries of the existing States are 
altered, the Parliament can by law make all consequential changes in the 
Constitution by simple majority and any Act of the Parliament for the- 
aforesaid purpose will not be deemed to be an amendment of the Constitu- 
tion.* 


Formation of new States and alteration oT boundaries etc. of existing 
States.— Under Art. 3, a new State may be formed or established in the follow- 


ing Ways : — 


1. Art. IV Section 3 (I) of the U. S. Constitution. 

2. Art. IV. Section V (2) of the U. S. Constitute 

3. Art. 4 of ibe Constitution. 



38 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


(1) by separation of territory from any State ; or 

(2) by uniting two or more States ; or 

(3) by uniting parts of States ; or , 

14) by uniting any territory to a part of any State. 

Parliament under this Article can also increase or decrease the area of any 
State or alter the boundaries or change the name of any State. Article 3 deals 
thus with the formation of a new State out of the territories or the existing 
States. The power to form new States under Art. 3 (a) includes the power 
to form a new State or Union territory by uniting a p3ri of any State or Union 
territory to any other State of Union territory. The word ‘State’ in Art. 3, 
Cls. (a) to (e) includes a ‘Union territory’ also. 

The Indian Constitution empowers the Parliament to alter the territory 
or integrity of its units, i. e. States, without their consent or concurrence. It 
can form new States, and can alter the area, boundaries or names of the 
existing States by a law passed by a simple majority. The conditions laid 
down for making of such a law are — First, no Bill for the formation of new 
States or the alteration of the boundaries or the nam.s of the existing States 
shall be introduced in either House of the Parliament except on the recom- 
mendation of the President. Secondly, if the Dill affects the area, boundaries 
or names of the States, the President is required to refer the Bill to the Legis- 
lature of the State, so affected for expressing its views within the period 
specified by the President. 

The President may extend the period so specified. If the State Legisla- 
ture to which the Bill has been referred, does not express its views within the 
period so specified or extended, the Bill may be introduced in the Parliament 
even though the views of the Slate have not been obtained by the President. 
If the State Legislature expresses its views within the lime so specified or extend- 
ed, the Parliament is not bound to accept or act upon-lhe views of the State 
Legislature. 1 Further, it is not necessary to make fresh reference to State 
Legislature every time an amendment to the Bill is proposed and accepted. 2 3 4 

, . Thus, it is clear that the very existence of a State depends upon the 
sweetwill of the Central Government. The reason why such a power has 
been conferred on the Union has already been explained in the preceding 
Chapter. 

These Articles® thus demonstrate the flexibility of the Indian Constitution. 
By a simple majority and by ordinary legislative process Parliament may torm 
a new State or alter the boundaries, etc. or existing States and thereby change 
the political map of India. i 

Cession ol Indian territory to foreign country.— Under Article 3 (c) Parlia- 
ment may by law increase or diminish the area of any State. The diminution 
of the area of any State may occur where a part of the State is taken out 
and added to another State. Parliament has even power to cut away the entire 
area of a State to form a new State or to increase the area of any State. Does 
the power of Parliament to diminish the area of any State include also the 
power to cede InrUsn territory ip a foreign Stole ? 

"Uie question came up for consideration before the Supreme Court of 
India in reference made by the President of India under Article 143.* The 
facts of the case arc as follows : 

1. Babulal v. State of Bombay, AIR I960 SC 51. 

2. In re Berubafi Union, AIR I960 SC 858 at p 860. 

3. Articles 2, 3 and 4 of the Constitution 

4. Reference by the Presided of India under Article 143, AIR I960 SC 84 J, 



5] 


THS UNION AND rTS TERfUTORT 


39 


The Indo-Pakistan Agreement entered into in 1958 for resolving certain 
border disputes, provided inter alia (i) for the transfer of one-half of the area 
of Berubari Union by India to Pakistan and (ii) for the exchange of old 
Cooch-Bihar enclaves. Berubari Union comprised an area of 9 square miles 
in the State of West Bengal with a population of About 12,000. When the 
Central Government sought to implement the agreement, a powerful political 
agitation was started against the proposed transfer of territory to Pakistan, 
the President referred the matter to the Supreme Court for its Advisory opinion 
under Article 143. The questions referred to were : (i) Is any legislative 
action necessary for the implementation of the agreement relating to Berubari 
Union, and (ii) if so, is a law of Pailiament under Article 3 sufficient or is an 
amendment of the Constitution in accordance with Article 368 necessary or 
both. 

On behalf of the Union Government, it was contended that the agree- 
ment did nothing more than to ascertain the true boundary of India and, 
therefore, its implementation did not involve handing over any Indian territory 
but only territory which did belong to Pakistan and this could be done in the 
exercise of the executive power of the Union. 

The Supreme Court rejected this contention and held that transfer agree- 
ment involves cession of territory included in the Schedule and it was outside 
the scope of Parliamentary legislation. The power of Parliament under Art. 3 
to ‘diminish the area of any State does not cover ceding of Indian territory 
to a foreign State’. Accordingly, the Court held that the Parliament has no 
power under Art. 3 (c) to make a law to implement the Berubari agreement, 
an agreement entered into with the Government of a foreign State ceding 
Indian territory to a foreign-State. The said agreement can only be implement- 
ed by an amendment of the Constitution in accordance with Art. 3o8. The 
territory ceded may be a part of the State or Union territory. 1 2 Construing 
the scheme of Arts. 2 and 3 the Court held that Art. 3 'deals with internal re- 1 
adjustment Inter se of the territories of the constituent States of India. The 
area diminished under Art. 3 (c) continues to be part of the territory of 
India, Art. 3 (c) docs not, therefore, provide for cession of national territory 
to a foreign State. Hence, an agreement involving a transfer of territory 
to a foreign State cannot be implemented simply by passing a law under Art. 3. 
For this an amendment of the Constitution is necessary. 

This does not, however, mean that there is no power to acquire of cede 
territory. The power to acquire and cede territory is an attribute of sover- 
eignty and India being a sovereign State it has power to acquire and cede 
territory both under International Law and according to the Preamble. 

Pursuant to the Court’s opinion, the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) 
Act, 1960, was passed to give effect to the transfer of certain territory to 
Pakistan under an agreement entered into between the Government of India 
and Pakistan. 

But an agreement to refer a boundary dispute does not require for 
its implementation any Parliamentary legislation. In .\faganbhal v. Union of 
India * dispute regarding the adjustment of a boundary line in Runn of Kutch 
between India and Pakistan, was referred to a Tribunal. The Government 
wanted to implement the award without any Parliamentary legislation. It 
was held that an agreement to refer the dispute to a Tribunal did not amount 
cession of territory to a foreign country and hence an amendment of the Cons- 
titution was not necessary for its implementation. It could be implemented 1 
by Government of India under its executive power. 

1, Rim Kishere v. Union of India, AtR 1966 SC 644. 

2. MR 1969 SC 7SJ. 



6 

Citizenship (Arts. 5—11) 

Meaning of Citizenship.— "Ibe population or [a State is divided into two 
classes— citizens and aliens. A citizen of a State is a person who enjoys full 
civil and political rights. Citizens are different from aliens who do not 
enjoy all the above-mentioned rights. Cuizensbip carries with it certain advan- 
tages conferred by the Constitution. Aliens do not enjoy these advantages. 
The following fundamental rights are available only to citizens : 

(1) The right not to be discriminated against any citizen on grounds of 
religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth (Art. 15). 

(2) The right to equality of opportunity in the matter of public employ- 
ment (Art. 16). 

(3) The right to seven freedoms enumerated in Art. 19, i. e,, freedom 
of speech and expression ; assembly ; association ; movement ; residence ; pro- 
fession. 

(4) Cultural and educational rights conferred by Arts. 79 and 30. 

(5) Fhcu, there are certain offices under tbe Constitution which can be 
occupied by citizens only, e. g. offices of the President (Art. 58 (1) (a)] ; Vice- 
President (Art. 66 (3) (a) ; Judges of the Supreme Court [Art. 124 (3)] or 
of a High Court [Art. 217 (2)) ; Attorney-General [Art. 76 (I)] ; Governor 
of a State (Art. 157); Advocate-General of a State (Art. 165). 

(6) The right to vote for election to the House of the People and the 
Legislative Assemblies of State. Only a citizen of India can become member 
of the Union and the State Legislatures. 

Constitutional Provisions. — The Constitution does not lay down a per- 
manent or comprehensive provision relating to citizenship in India. Part II 
of tbe Constitution simply describes classes of persons who would be deemed 
to be tbe citizens of India at the commencement of the Constitution, that 
is, 26th January, 1950, and leaves tbe entire law of the citizenship to be regu- 
lated bylaw made by Parliament. Article 11 expressly confers power on 
Parliament to make laws to provide for such matters. In exercise cf its power 
the Parliament has enacted the Indian Citizenship Act, 1955. This Act pro- 
vides for tbe acquisition and termination of citizenship subsequent to the 
commencement of the Constitution. 

Citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution, i. e. January 26, 
1950.— The following persons, under Arts. 5 to 8 of the Constitution of India, 
became citizens of India at the commencement of the Constitution : 

1. Citizenship by domicile (Art. 5), 

2. Citizenship of emigrants from Pakistan (Art. 6). 

3. Citizenship of migrants to Pakistan (Art. 7). 

4. Citizenship of Indians abroad (Art. 8). 

1. Citizenship by domicile (Art. 5). — Article 5 deals with this matter. 
A person is entilled to citizenship by domicile if be fulfils two conditions 
laid down by Art. 5. First, he must, at the commencement of the Constitution, 
have his domicile in tbe territory of India. Secondly, such person must fulfil 
any one of the three conditions laid down in tbe Article, namely, (1) he was 
born in India, (2) either of his patents was born in India, (3) he must have 
r An v ' 



61 .. \ 


-CITIZENSHIP 


41 


been ordinarily resident in the territory of India for not less than five years 
immediately before the commencement of the Constitution. 

Domicile in India is considered an essential requirement for acquiring the 
status of Indian citizenship. But the term 'domicile’ is not defined in the Cons- 
titution. Ordinarily, it means permanent home, or place where a person 
resides with the intention of remaining there for an indefinite period.* The 
simplest definition of domicile has been given by Cbitty, J.* He said', “That 
place is properly the domicile of a person in which his inhabitation is fixed 
without any present intention of removing therefrom.” 3 

’ Two elements are necessary for the existence of domicile— 

(i) a residence of a particular kind, and 

(ii) an intention of a particular kind. 

' The residence need not be continuous but it must be indefinite, not purely 
fleeting. The intention must be a present intention to reside forever in the 
country where the residence has been taken up. Domicile is not the same thing 
as residence. Mere residence in a place is not sufficient to constitute domicile. 
It must be accompanied by the intention to make it his permanent home. 
Thus, there must be both the factum and animus to constitute the existence of 
domicile for neither domicile nor mere residence is sufficient to make him an 
Indian citizen. Domicile accompanied with five years’ residence are necessary 
to make a person a citizen. Thus a person born in Goa of Goan parents 
came to Bombay in his boyhood, was educated there, had resided there since 
then and did his father’s business there. He was held to be an Indian citizen 
by domicile. 4 

Domicile is of two kinds : domicile of origin and domicile of choice. 
Every person is born with a domicile of origin. It is domicile received by him 
at his birth. The domicile of origin of every person is the country in which at 
the time of his birth his father was domiciled. 

Thus the domicile of origin is a concept of law. It clings to a man till 
he abandons it and acquires a new domicile. Every independent person can 
acquire a domicile of choice by a combination of (a) actual residence in a parti- 
cular place, and (b) intention to remain there permanently or for an indefinite 
period. 

In Mohammad Reia v. State of Bombay * the appellant came to India in 
1938. He went on pilgrimage to Iraq in 1945. On return, he was registered 
as a foreigner and several limes his stay in India was extended. In 1957 his 
request to extend the stay period was refused. He contended that he must be 
regarded as a citizen of India under Article 5, but his appeal was dismissed. 
The Court held that though he was originally resident ; he did not acquire 
Indian citizenship because he did not have a domicile in India. When the 
appellant returned from Iraq, he took over the job of a cashier in • hotel. 
That by itself was held insufficient to establish that there was a change in his 
mind of the kind necessary to acquire a new domicile. His application for 



42 Constitutional law of jndia [Chap. 

extending his stay in India made From time lo time fortified this conclusion. 
The domicile of choice continues until the former -domicile has been resumed 
or another has been acquired. 

A minor or a married woman is not independent person. Neither of 
these classes has the legal capacity to make a change of domicile. Therefore, 
the domicile of an infant generally follows the domicile of his father, 1 2 3 4 * while a 
married woman takes the domicile of her husband." A widow retains the 
domicile of her husband until changed by her own act. 9 

Intention is an important element in determining the domicile of a person. 
It can be inferred from the conduct of persons. Thus a person in Government 
service, who was given the choice for opting for India or Pakistan, who opted 
for Pakistan, actually went to Pakistan, served there under the Government 
of Pakistan, but who subsequently resigned his job there and came to 
India cannot claim the benefit of Art. 5 for he never became the citizea of 
India. 1 

2. Citizenship of persons who migrated to India from Pakistan before the 
commencement of the Constitution.— Persons who have migrated from Pakistan 
have been classified into two categories for the purposes of citizenship, i. e. (i) 
those who came to India before July 19, 1948, and (ii) those who came on or 
after July 19, 1948. 

Article 6 provides that a person who has migrated to India from Pakistan 
shall be deemed to be a citizen of India at the fcommencement of the Constitu- 
tion, i. e. on 26th Jtmuary, 1950, if he or either of his parents or any of his 
grandparents were born in India as defined in' the Government of India Act, 
1935, and in addition to above condition which applies in both cases fulfils one 
of the following two conditions : — 

(i) in case he migrated to India before July 19, 1948 (the date on 
which the permit system for such migration was introduced) he 
has been ordinarily residing in India since the date of his mig- 
ration ; or 

(ii) in case he migrated on or after July 19, 1948, be has been registered 
as citizen of India by an officer appointed by the Government of 
India for the purpose J 

Provided that no person shall be so registered unless he has been residing 
in India for at least six months immediately before the date of his application 
for registration. If the above conditions are satisfied, a person shall be deemed 
to be a citizen of India. 

3. Citizenship of Migrants of Pakistan.— Under Article 7 a citizen by 
domicile (Art. 5) or by migration (Ait. 6) ceases to be a citizen if he has mig- 
rated to Pakistan after March 1, 1947.' An exception is, however, made fn 
favour of a person who ihas returned to India on the basis of a permit for 
resettlement in India. Such a person is entitled to become a citizen of India 
if be fulfils other conditions necessary for immigrants from Pakistan after Jqlv 
19, 1948, under Art. 6. He can register himself as a citizen of India in the 
same manner as a person migrating from Pakistan after July 19, 1948. 

Article 7 thus overrides Arts. 5 and 6.* Both Art. 6 and Art. 7 use the term 
‘migrated’. The meaning of the term ‘migrated’ came for consideration before 

1. Naziranbai v. State of M.B., A. I. R. 1957 M. B. 1 : Sharafat v, state of II p 

A. I. R. 1960 All 637. 1 ’ 

2. Karimunissa v. State of M. P., A. I. R. 1955 Nag, 6. 

3. Prakash v. Shabni, A. 1. R. 1965 J. & K. 83. 

4. Astern Khan v. Fazal Haque Kbao. A. I. R. 1959 All. 79. 

J. State of Bihar v. Kumar Amar Singh. A. !. R. 1955 S. C. 282. 



CITIZENSHIP '* 


43 


6 ] 


the Supreme Court in a recent case of Kulathl v. State of Kerala. 1 According to 
the Court the term ‘migrated* used in Arts. 6 and 7 has to be construed with 
reference to the context, purpose and the prevailing political condition at the 
time the Constitution was being enacted. So interpreted, the word 'migrated* 
could mean nothing except voluntarily going from India to Pakistan permanen- 
tly or temporarily. The majority held that the word ‘migrate’ was used in a 
wider sense of moving from one country to another with the qualification that 
such movement was not for a short visit or for a special purpose. 

Thus it is a question of fact whether a person has migrated to or has gone 
to Pakistan on a temporary visit only. It is a question to be decided on the 
facts and circumstances of each case.* Citizenship comes to an end only when 
there is a migration and not where there was only a temporary visit. But in 
the context of the Constitution, it has the notion of transference of allegiance 
from India to Pakistan. A temporary visit on business or otherwise cannot 
amount to migration. 3 

In State of Bihar v. Kumar Amar Singh * one Kumar Rani who was 
admittedly born in the territory of India, and claimed to be the lawfully wed- 
ded wife of an Indian cilizen whose domicile was Indian at all material times, 
left India for Pakistan in July, 1948, for returning to India in December, 1948 
on a temporary permit and went back to Pakistan in April, 1949. On May J4, 
1953, she came back to India under a> permanent permit obtained from the 
High Commissioner for India in Pakistan, which was cancelled on July 12, 
1950, because it was wrongly issued without the concurrence of the Government 
as required by the rules made under the Influx of Pakistan (Control) Act, 1949. 
She contended first that she had never ceased to be a citizen of India because 
she was bom in India and her domicile was the domicile of her husband who 
was an Indian and consequently she was a citizen of India. She contended, 
alternatively that the proviso to Art. 7 applied to her since she had returned to 
India on a permanent permit and the subsequent cancellation of the permit was 
illegal and irrelevant. It was held that ‘there coaid be no doubt that the lady 
must be held to have migrated from the territory of India 8fter 1-3-1947, 
although her husband stayed in India*. She could not prove that she went to 
Pakistan for a temporary purpose. The Supreme Court observed : “Article 7 
clearly overrides Art. 5. It is peremptory in its -scope and makes no exception 
for such a case, /. e. of the wife migrating to Pakistan leaving her husband in 
India.” , ' 

4, Citizenship of persons of Indian origin residing outside India.— Article 
8 provides that any person or either of whose parents or any of whose grand- 
parents was born in India as defined in the Government of India Act. 1935, 
and who is ordinarily residing In any country outside India, shall be deemed to 
be a citizen of India if he has been registered as a citizen of India by the 
Diplomatic or Consular representatives of India in the country where he is for 
the time being residing— on an application made by him to such diplomatic or 
consular representative, whether before or after 26th January, 1950, in the 


AIR 1966 SC 1614, followed in MiahkitruIIUsin r. Union of India. AIR 1967 SC 
JfS. Il should be Doled that l he Supreme Court his in ihii case overruled its earlier 
decision in Sir t.Stianno Devi v. Man;*! Saw. AIR 196| SC St. which hat held 
that the word ’migrated* means going from one place to another *tth tha intention 
of pemuremiy residing in the latter place. 


2. Nttar r. Union of India. AIR 19JS R»j 6J ; »ee also Slate of Bihar *. Ktmur Amir 
Singh. AIR I9JJ SC 2S2. 

J. Ataur Rahman v. Suit of M. P-, AIR I95t Nig. 41. 


4. AIR 19SS SC2$2. 



44 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP tNDIA [Chap. 

form and manner prescribed by the Government of the Dominion 1 of India or 
the Government of India. This Article confers citizenship on Indian nationals 
residing abroad on their complying with its provisions., ■ 

Article 9 provides that if a person voluntarily acquires the citizenship of 
any foreign State he shall not be able to claim to be a citizen of India under 
Articles 5, 6 and 8. It deals only with voluntary acquisition of citizenship 
of a foreign State before the Constitution came into force. Case of voluntary 
acquisition of a foreign citizenship before the commencement of the Constitu- 
tion will have to be dealt with by the Government of India under the Citizen- 
ship Act of 1955. 

Article 10 provides that every person who is or is deemed to be a citizen 
of India under any of the foregoing provisions shall continue to be a citizen of 
India subject, however, to the provisions of any law that may be made by 
Parliament. Thus in exercise of this power Parliament may take away the 
right of citizenship of any person. But the right to citizenship given under 
the foregoing provisions can only be taken away by an express law made by 
Parliament. It cannot be taken away indirectly. 1 In Ebrahlm Wazlr v. State of 
Bombay , 2 the constitutional validity of the Influx from Pakistan (Control) Act, 
1949, was involved. This Act provides that no person domiciled in India or 
Pakistan shall enter India from Pakistan without a permit. If a person enters 
India without a permit he commits an offence punishable under the Act. 
Section 7 of the Act authorises the Central Government to direct the removal 
from India of any person who has committed, or against whom a reasonable 
suspicion exists that he has committed an offence under the Act. The Supreme 
Court held that section 7 is ultra vires of .Parliament because to allow the 
forcible removal of an Indian citizen from India would be tantamount to 
destroying the right of citizenship conferred by Part 2 of the Constitution. 
The right of citizenship, the Court said, could only be taken away by recourse 
to Art. 11 of the Constitution. Thus in absence of Bny law expressly made 
under Art. 11, the right of citizenship cannot be destroyed by an Act made for 
a different purpose. 

Citizenship under Ihe Citizenship Act, 1955.— Parliament, in exercise of the 
power given to it under Art. 11 of the Constitution, has passed the Citizenship 
Act, 1955, making provisions for. acquisition and termination of citizenship 
after the commencement of the Constitution. The Act provides for the 
acquisition of Indian citizenship after the commencement of the Constitution in 
fire ways, l. e., birth, descent, registration, naturalization and incorporation of 
territory : 

(1) Citizenship by birth.— Every person born in India on or after January 
1950 shall be a citizen of India by birth. .However, such a person shall not be 
a citizen of India, if, at the time of bis birth (a) his father possesses such 
immunity from suits and legal process as is accorded to any envoy of a foreign 
sovereign power, or (b) his father is an enemy alien. 

(2) Citizenship by descent .— Broadly speaking, a person outside India on 
or after 26th January, 1 950, shall be a citizen of India by descent, if his father 
was a citizen of India at the time of that person’s birth. 

'* (3) Citizenship by registration .— The prescribed authority may on applica- 
tion register as a citizen of India, any person who is not a citizen by virtue of 

1, Ebrahim Wazir v. Stale of Bombay, AIR 1952 SC 229. 

2 Ibid. 



6 ] 


CITIZENSHIP 


45 


the Constitution or the provisions or the Citizenship Act and belongs to any of 
the following categories 

' , (a) persons of Indian origin who are ordinarily resident in India for six 
months immediately before making an application for registration ; 

(b) persons of Indian origin who arc ordinarily resident in any country or 
place outside India ; 

(c) women who are, or have been, married to citizen of India ; 

. (d) minor children of persons who are citizens of India ; 

# ! (c) persons of full age and capacity who are citizens of a country men- 
tioned in the First Schedule. 

(4) Citizenship by naturalisation . — Where an application in the prescribed 
manner is made by any person of full age and'capacity, who is not a citizen of 
countries specified in the First Schedule the Central Government may, if satis- 
fied that the applicant is qualified for naturalization, grant him a certificate of 
naturalization. The qualifications for naturalization are the following 

(a) he must not be a citizen of a country where Indian citizens are pre- 
vented from becoming citizen by naturalization, 

! (b) he has renounced the citizenship of the other country, 

(c) he has either resided in India or h3s been in Government service for 
12 months before the date of making the application for naturalization, or 
during 7 years prior to these 12 months, he has resided or has been in the 
Government service for not less than four years, 

(d) be must take an oath of allegiance, 

(e) he is of a good character, 

(0 he has an adequate knowledge of a language recognised by the 
Constitution. 


(g) that after naturalization being granted to him, he intends to reside 
in India or to serve under the Government of India. However, if in the 
opinion of the Central Government the applicant has rendered distinguished 
service to the cause of science, philosophy, art. literature, world peace or 
human progress, it may waive all or any of the abose conditions for naturali- 
zation in his case (Proviso to section 6). 


(5) Citizenship by incorporation of territory.— U any new territory becomes 
a part of India, the Government of India shall specify the persons of the terri- 
tory to be citizens of India. 


Termination of citizenship.— The Citizenship Act, 1955, also lays down 
how the citizenship of India may be lost whether it was acquired under the 
Citizenship Act, 1955, or prior to it, or under the provisions of the Constitu- 
tion. It may happen in any of the three ways (a) renunciation, or (b) termina- 
tion, and (c) deprivation. 


(a) Renunciation of citizenship— ha Indian citizen of full age and capacity, 
who is also a citizen or national of another country, can renounce his Indian 
citizenship by making a declaration to that effect and having it regtsteTed. 
But if mch a declaration is made during any war in which India is engaged, 
the registration shall be withheld until the Central. Government otherwise 
directs. When a male person renounces his citizenship, every minor child cl 
his ceases to be an Indian citizen. Such a child may. however, resume Indian 
citizenship, if he makes a declaration to that efTect within a year of his attain- 
Ing full ag C |g yean. 


46 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA [Chap. 

(i>) Termination of citizenship {Section 3).~If a citizen of India voluntarily 
acquires the citizenship of another country he shall cease to be a citizen of India, 
This provision, however, does not apply to a citizen who during a war in 
which India may be engaged voluntarily acquires the citizenship of another 
country. If any question arises as to whether, when or how any person has 
acquired the citizenship of another country, it is to be determined by such 
authority and in such manner as may be prescribed by the rules (section 9). 

(c) Deprivation of citizenship .— Deprivation is a compulsory termination 
of the citizenship of India. A citizen of India by naturalization, registration, 
domicile and residence, may be deprived of bis citizenship by an order of the 
Central Government if it satisfied that— 

(a) registration or naturalization was obtained by means of fraud, false 
representation or concealment of any material Tact ; or 

(b) he has shown himself by act of speech to be disloyal or disaffected 
towards the Indian Constitution ; or 

(c) during a war in which India may be engaged he has unlawfully 
traded or communicated with the enemy ; or 

(d) within five years of his registration or naturalization he has been 
sentenced to imprisonment for not less than two years ; or 

(e) he has been ordinarily resident out of India for seven years conti- 
nuously. 1 

Before malting an order depriving citizenship, the Central Government 
is to give to tbe person concerned a written notice containing the ground on 
which the order is proposed to be made and in certain cases, he might have 
his case referred to a Committee of Inquiry. The Central Government is then 
bound to Terer tbe case to a Committee consisting of a Chairman and two 
other members. The Committee of Inquiry shall hold the inquiry and the 
Central Government is to be ordinarily guided by its report in malting the 
order.* 

Commonwealth Citizenship. — Section i l of the Citizenship Act provides 
for Commonwealth citizenship. Every person who is a citizen of a Common- 
wealth country, shall by virtue of that citizenship have the status of Common- 
wealth citizenship in India. 

Section 1 2 empowers the Central Government to make provisions on the 
basis of reciprocity for the conferment of all or any of the rights of a citizen 
or India on the citizens of the U. K., Australia, Canada, Ceylon. New Zealand 
Pakistan, Federation of South Rhodesia and Nyasaland. 

Section 18 of the Act vests in the Central Government an authority to 
make rules under the Act. This section of the Indian Citizenship Act, 1955, 
makes it clear that it is very comprehensive legislation, covering up all possible 
details regarding citizenship. 

One citizenship in India, — It should be noted that our Constitution, 
though federal, recognises one citizenship only, that is, the citizenship of 
India. There is not separate State citizenship. Every citizen has the same 

I. This will not apply if he is a student abroad, or is io service of a Government in India 

or an International Organization of which India is a member or bas registered 

annually at an Indian Consulate hit intention to retain his Indian citizenship. 

}. Section >0, Indian Citizenship Act 



6] d j i 


' C1IIZENSBIP 


47 


rights, privileges and • immunities of citizenship, no matter in what State he 
resides. In Federal States like the U. S. A. and Switzerland, there is a dual 
citizenship, namely, the citizenship of U. S. A. and the citizenship of the State 
where a person is born and permanently resides, aDd there are distinct rights 
and obligations flowing from the two kinds of citizenship. In India, a person 
bom or resident in any State can acquire only one citizenship, that is, the 
citizenship of India. 

A Company or Corporation is not a citizen of India under Art. 19.— 
Citizenship as defined in Part II includes only natural person and not juristic 
persons like corporations. 1 2 3 4 In Kumar and Bros. v. Iron and Steel Controller , a 
the Calcutta High Court interpreted the term ‘person in Art. 5 of the Cons- 
titution to include both ‘natural’ and ‘artificial* person. Hence a company 
could become a citizen. But in State Trading Corporation of India v. Commer- 
cial Tax Officer* the Supreme Court held that company or corporation is not 
a citizen of India and cannot, therefore, claim such of the fundamental 
rights as have been conferred upon citizens. The citizenship conferred 
on a citizen by Part II of the Constitution, the Court said, is concerned only 
with natural persons and not juristic persons. In this case (be State Trading 
Corporation was sought to be taxed in respect of sales effected by them in the 
course of their business operation. The corporation contended that its trans- 
action related to inter-State sales and is therefore, exempted from taxation 
under Art. 286 (1). The impugned tax was, therefore, an infringement of its 
fundamental right under Art. 19 (l)(g). The Supreme Court, however, held 
that the State Trade Corporation is not a citizen and tbefore cannot claim the 
right under Art. 19 (lXs)* 

In Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co. v. State of Bihar * in a petition by 
the company some shareholders also joined. They argued that though 
the company was not a citizen but its shareholders are citizens and if it is 
shown that all its shareholders are citizens the veil of corporate personality 
may be lifted to protect their fundamental rights. The court rejected this 
argument and held that “if this pica is upheld, it would really mean that what 
the corporations or companies cannot achieve directly, can be achieved by them 
indirectly by relying upon the doctrine of lifting the corporate veil.’’ 

But in the Bank Nationalisation Case.* the Court held that “A measure” 
executive or legislative may impair the ri$ht of the company alone, and not 
of its shareholders ; it may impair the rights of the shareholder and not of 
the company, it may impair the right of the shareholders as well as of the com- 
pany. Jurisdiction of court to grant relief cannot be denied when by State 
action the rights, of the individual shareholder are impaired, if that action 
impairs the rights of the company as well. The test in determining whether 
the shareholder’s right is impaired is not formal ; it is essentially qualita- 
tive. If the State action impairs the right of the shareholders as well as of 
the company the Court will not, only upon technical ground, deny itself 
jurisdiction to grant relief. A shareholder is entitled to protection of Art. 19 
of the Constitution. The Fundamental rights of the shareholders as citizens 
are not lost when they associate to form a company. When their fundamental 

1. S. T. Corporation of India v. Commercial Tax Officer, AIR 1963 SC 184. 

2. AIR 1961 Cal 258. 

3. AIR 1963 SC 1811. 

4. AIR 1965 SC 40. See al» Barium Chemicati Ltd, v. Company Law Board, AIR 195? 

SC 295. 

3. AIR 1970 SC 565, 



43 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP tNDIA 


[Chap. 


I 


rights as shareholders are impaired by State action their rights as shareholders 
are protected. The reason is that the shareholder’s rights are equally and 
necessarily affected if (he rights of the company are affected. 

The result of the Bank Nationalisation's case, is that if the action of the 
State impairs the right of the company thereby affecting the rights of an 
individual shareholder the protection of Article 19 will be available to him, 
This ruling of the Supreme Court has thus neutralised much of the adverse 
effect of the State Trading Corporation Case. 1 2 

The Bank Nationalisation case was followed by the Supreme Court in the 
Bennett Coleman &. Co. v. Union of India* In that case the question was whe- 
ther the shareholder, the editor, the printer have right to freedom under 
Article 19 of the Constitution. Relying on the Bank Nationalisation Case 
the Court held that the protection of Article is available to a shareholder, 
editor, printer and publisher of a newspaper. The Court said, the right of 
share-holders with regard to Art. 19(1) (a) are protected and manifested by 
the newspapers owned and controlled by the shareholders through the medium 
of the corporation. The individual tights of speech and espressions of 
editors, directors and shareholders are all exercised through their newspapers 
through which they speak. The press reached the public through the news- 
papers. The shareholders speak through their editors. The locus standi of 
the shareholders is beyond challenge after the ruling of this Court in the 
Bank Nationalisation Case. 

In Godhra Electric Co. Ltd v. Stale of Gujrat? the Court held that though 
a company is not a citizen under Art. 19 but a shareholder, a managing 
director of a company has right to carry on business through agency of 
company and if that right is taken |away or abridged be is not disabled 
from challenging the validity of the provisions of any Act, which affects his 
right. 


1. AIR 1961 SC 18H. Also see Jain, M. P. : Comments 
(IS)JILI 1973, p. 154. 

2. AIR 197 JSC 106. 

1. AIR 1*171 SC 32. 


ibe Beane! Coleman Case 



7 

Fundamental Rights 
(Arts. 12-13) 

Origin and dcrelopment of Fundamental Rights.— Part III of the Constitu- 
tion contains a long list of Fundamental rights. This Chapter of the Consti- 
tution of India has very well been described as the Magna Carta of India 1 
As early as 1214 the English people exacted an assurance from King 
John for respect of the then ancient liberties. The Magna Carta is the evi- 
der.ee of their success which is a written document. This is the first written 
document relating to the fundamental rights of citizens. Thereafter from time to 
time the King had to accede to many rights to his subjects. In 1689 the Bill 
of Rights was written consolidating all important rights and liberties of the 
English people. In France Declaration of the Bights of Man and the Citizen 
(1789) declared the natural, inalienable and sacred rights of Man. Follow- 
ing the spirit of the Magna Carta of the British and the Declaration of the 
Rights of Man and the citizen of France, the Americans incorporated the 
Bill of Rights in their Constitution. The Americans were first to give Bill 
of Rights a constitutional status. Thus, when the Constitution of India 
was being framed the background for the incorporation of Bill of Rights 
was already present. The framers took inspiration from this and incorporated 
a full Chapter in the Constitution dealing with fundamental rights. But the 
declaration of fundamental rights in the Indian Constitution is the most 
elaborate and comprehensive yet framed by any State. 

The inclusion of a Chapter on Fundamental Rights in the Constitution of 
India in an accordance with the trend of modern democratic thought, the idea 
being to preserve that which is an indispensable condition of a free society. 
The aim of having a declaration of fundamental rights is that certain elemen- 
tary rights, such as, right to life, liberty, freedom of speech, freedom of faith 
and so on, should be regarded as inviolable under all conditions and that the 
shifting majority in Legislatures of the country should not have a free hand in 
interfering with these fundamental rights.* In West Virginia State Board of 
Education v. Barnett ,* Jackson, J., dealing with the nature and the purpose of 
the Bill of Rights observed : “The very purpose of Bill of Rights was to 
withdraw certain subjects from the vicissitudes of political controversy, to 
place them beyond the reach of majorities and officials and to establish them 
as legal principles to be applied by the courts. One's right to life, liberty and 
property, to free speech, a free press, freedom of worship and assembly and 
other fundamental rights may not be submitted to vote, they depend on 
the outcome of no elections.” 

Need for Fundamental Rights. — Fundamental Rights were deemed essential 
to protect the rights and liberties of the people against the encroachment of 


1* V. O. Ham Chandra n, Fundamental Riehli tod Coastifnlional Remedies, VoL I. 

. i9M.p. t. 

2. A.K. Gopalan’* case. AIR 1950 SC 27. 

3- 319 U. S. 624 ; S7 L ed 1628- 


( 49 ) 



$0 


coNsrmhioNAr. Law op ihdjA 


[Chap, 


ihc cower delegated by them to their Government. They are Umtalion 
upon all the powers orthe Government, legislaltye as well as ejecimve and 
they are esscotial to the preservatiotCof public aod private rights, notwitb* 
standing the representative character of political ^instruments. 

Speaking about ‘the 'importance of fundamental rights in the recent case 
or Maneka Gandhi v. Union of ‘India* Bhagwati, J, observed, “These funda- 
mental rights represent tbe basic values cherished by the people of this country 
(India) since the Vedic times and’ they are calculated to protect the dignity of 
the individual and create conditions in which every human being can develop 
his personality to the fullest extent. They weave a ‘pattern of guarantee on 
the basic structure of humari rights’ and impose negative obligations on the 
State not to encroach on individual liberty in its various dimensions.” 

These rights are regarded as fundamental because they arc most essential 
for the attainment by the individual of his full intellectual, moral and spiritual 
stature. The negation of these lights will keep the moral and spiritual life 
stunted and his potentialities ' undeveloped. The declaration of fundamental 
rights in the Constitution serve as reminder to the Government in power 
that certain liberties, assured to the people by the Constitution ate to be 
respected. "The statement of Fundamental Rights thus limits' the range of 
State activity In appropriate direction in the interest of' the liberty of the 
citizens ." 8 

The ‘danger of encroachment on citizen’s liberties is particularly great 
in parliamentary system in which those who form the Government are leaders 
of the majority party in the Legislature and can, get laws made according to 
their wishes. The advocates of inclusion of these rights in the Indian Consti- 
tution emphasise that their incorporation in the Constitution vests them with 
a sanctity which the legislators dare not to violate so easily. 

The object behind the inclusion of the Chapter of Fundamental Rights in 
Indian Constitution is to establish 'a Government of Law and not of man* a 
governmental system' where the tyranny of majority does not oppress the 
minority. In short, the object is to establish Rule of Law and it would not be 
wrong to say that the Indian Constitution in this respect goes much ahead 
than any other Constitutions of the world. The object is not merely to provide 
security to and equality of citizenship of the people living in this land and 
thereby helping the process of nation building, but also and not less important 
to provide certain standards of conduct, citizenship, justice and fairplay They 
were intended to make all citizens and persons appreciate that the paramount 
law of the land has swept away privileges and has laid down that there is to 
be perfect equality between one section of the community and another in the 
matter of all those rights which are essential Tor the material and more perfec- 
tion of roan .” 1 2 3 4 


Striking a balance between Individual liberty and social needs.— Absolute 
and unrestricted, individual rights do not, and cannot exist in any modern 
State. Liberty, however, becomes a licence and jeopardises the liberty of 
others. “Civil liberties as guaranteed by the Constitution, imply the exis- 
tence of an organised society maintaining public order without which liberty 


1. Hartado v. People of California, 28 L ed. 232, per Mathews, J. 

2. AIR J978SC 597 at p. 619. 

3. Dr. M. P. Sharma : The Republic of India, p. 41. 

4. Moil Lai v. State of Utter Pradesh, AIR 1951 All. 237. 



• FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS 


51 


7 ] 


itself would be lost in the excess of unrestrained abuses.” 1 “If people were 
given complete and absolute liberty without any social control the result would 

be ruin Law is a scheme of social control, so that when we are concerned 

with, we are concerned only with the question of how much personal liberty is 
best and how much social control is best ”* 

' It is obvious that, if individuals are allowed to have absolute freedom of 
speech and action, the result would be chaos, ruin and an anarchy. On the 
other hand, if the State has absolute power to determine the extent of personal 
liberty the result would be tyranny. Hence, the question arises how to make a 
balance between the conflicting interests of individuals and of the society and 
particularly in a welfare State like ours. 

The Indian Constitution attempts to do it by enumerating what are 
fundamental rights and by setting limits within which they can be curtailed. 
The Constitution permits ‘reasonable* restrictions to be imposed on individual's 
liberties in the interest of society. In this connection following observation of 
Mukerjee, J., in A. K. Gopalan v. State of Madras* may be quoted : 

'‘There cannot be any such thing as absolute and uncontrolled liberty 
wholly freed from restraint, for that would lead to anarchy and disorder. The 
possession and enjoyment of all rights are subject to such reasonable conditions 
as may be deemed by the governing 'authority of the country essential to the 
safety, health, peace, general order 'and morals of the community. In some 
cases, restrictions have to be placed upon free exercise of Individual rights to 
safeguard the interest of society, on the other hand, social control which exists 
for public good has got to be restrained, lest it should be misused to the detri- 
ment of individual rights and liberties. Ordinarily, every man has the liberty 
to render his life as be pleases, to say what he will, to go where he wil!.to follow 
any trade and occupation or calling at his pleasure and to do cny other thing 
which he can lawfully do without any hindrance by any other person. On the 
other hand, for the very protection of these liberties the society must arm itself 
with certain powers. W£at the Constitution therefore attempts to do by declar- 
ing the rights of the people is to strike a balance between individual liberty and 
social control.” , - ....... 

Article 19 of the Constitution gives a list of individual liberties and pre- 
scribes in the various clauses the rirstrainti that may be- placed upon them by 
law so that they may not conflict with public welfare or general morality. 

. . American Constitution. — The Constitution or America embodies the Bill 
of Rights in the first ten amendments to the Constitution. These rights are 
declared in absolute terms. The Constitution contained no limitation on 
these rights.- Bat it was soon realised that for the' maintenance "of public 
order, to prevent corruption of the • public morals, incitement to trine and, 
the like, some limitations must of necessity' be imposed upon the liberty of 
the individual. The Supreme Court in interpreting the Constitution, had 
therefore to invent the doctrine of 'police power’ or the State, under which the 
States have the inherent power to impose , such restrictions upon the fonda-' 
mental rights as are necessary to protect the common good. e. g-, public health, 
safety and moral*.* • The liberty of an individual rami yield to the common 

t. Cot v. New Hampshire. (IM!)312U.S. 569«ip. SI*.' 

2. Willis— Const) re: ksal Law and the United States, pp. 4774J, . 

3. AIR 1950 SC 27.' 

4 G2MWT. New York. (1925) 2tt U. S. :€9 L. *d. It See also Cool* 

Cmstilatkwtl Law, p. XS9- 



52 


CONSUtUTIONAt LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


cood What is police power is again 3' question to be decided by the Court. 
The Supreme Court of America -has given a very wide meaning to the term 
■police power’ so as to include everything that tends to promote tbe public 
welfare, e. g., increase tbe industries of the State, develop its resources and 
add to its wealth and prosperity.* 

The Indian Constitution does not leave the question of limitation to be 
decided by the Judiciary. Limitations are prescribed by tbe Constitution itself. 
In addition to this, the Supreme Court has itself held that the provisions of our 
Constitution should be interpreted by the plain words used in the Constitution 
and not with reference to the connotation to police powers in American Consti- 
tutional law. 2 Our Constitution does not recognise this doctrine of police 
power. The object of specifying the restrictions in clauses (2) to (6) of Art. 19 
was to define with certainty the limitations that might be imposed upon the 
freedoms instead of leaving that to the disposal of the judges. 8 

But what constitutes “reasonable restriction” is again a matter to be 
decided by the courts in each case which comes before it. By the reasoo of 
the word 'reasonable’, the Indian Constitution has partially imported the 
American doctrine. 4 The only difference is that while in U. S. A. the Supreme 
Court had to assume the power of reviewing legislative acts under the cover 
of Interpreting tbe “due process” clause, the Indian Constitution specifically 
confers this power upon the courts by the use of the word 'reasonable' in 
clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19. 

Suspension of Fundamental Rights.— As aaid earlier, the fundamental 
rights are not absolule rights. The Constitution, therefore,' provides for 
the curtailment or the suspension of the fundamental rights in the following 
circumstances: 


Article 358 provides that when tbe proclamation of emergency is made 
by the President under Art. 352 the seven freedoms guaranteed by Ait. 19 art 
automatically suspended and would continue to be so for the period of 
emergency. The suspension of lights guaranteed by Art. 19 thus removes the 
restrictions on the legislative and tbe executive powers or the State imposed by 
the Constitution. Any law, executive order made by the State during this 
period cannot be challenged on the ground that they are inconsistent with the 
rights guaranteed by Article 19. Such laws shall, however, cease to have effect 
as soon as tbe proclamation ceases and then Art. 19 is automatically revived 
and begins to operate. Article 358, however, makes it clear that things done 
or omitted to be done during the emergency cannot be challenged even after 
the emergency is over. 1 , , 


Article 359 further empowers the President to suspend the right 
to move any Court for the enforcement of rights conferred by Part III of ihe 
Constitution during the continuance of emergency. The suspension of the right 
to move the courts for the enforcement of the fundamental rights can be done 
by an order of the President. He may mention in his order the rights whose 
enforcement is to be suspended. The order of the President may extend to the 
whole or auy part of the territory of India. 


It is to be noted that while under Article 358 the rights conferred by Art? 


1. Day Brite Lighting v. Missouri, (1932)342 U. S. 421 1 
Z Chiraojit Lai v. Union of India, AIR 1951 SC 41. per Mukbcrjea, J. at p, 56. 

3. C. A.D.Vol.Vn.p.41. 

4. D, P. Basu — Commentary on the Constitution of India, 3rd Fd. (|96J), p. 15J. 



7] 


FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS 


53 


19 are automatically suspended, under Article 359 the suspension can only be 
brought about by an order of the President. 

In Habeas Corpus Case 1 the Supreme Court held that in view of the 
Presidential order under Article 359 suspending the right to move any Court 
for the enforcement of the fundamental rights • no person has any locus 
standi to file any petition under Art. 226 before a High Court or Supreme 
Court under Art. 32 for a writ of habeas corpus or any other, writ or order or 
direction to challenge the legality of an order of detention on the ground that 
the order is not under or. in compliance with the Act or is illegal or vitiated 
by mala fide os is based on extraneous considerations. 

The (44th Amendment ) Act, 1978 has now introduced a number of 
safeguards against the abuse of the emergency powers. It provides that now 
under Art. 358, Art. 19 will be suspended only when a proclamation of emer- 
gency is declared on the ground of , war- or external aggression and not on 
the ground of ‘armed rebellion* as has been provided by the (42nd Amendment 
Act, 1976. Secondly, it provides that Art. 358 will not apply to any law 
which is not {elated to emergency..., The Amendment Act has amended Art. 
359 which provides that the Presidential order suspending , the Tight to'mov^ 
the Court for the enforcement of a fundamental right cannot be exercised in 
respect to the right to life and personal liberty.! This • means that in future it 
will not be possible to suspend the right to life and personal liberty guaranteed 
by Art. 21. This is intended to prevent the recurrence of the happenings during 
1975 emergency. ‘ ' 

Classification of Fundamental Rights.— The fundamental rights as incor- 
porated in the Indian Constitution can be classified under the following six’ 
groups: , _ . . 

(a) Right to equality (Arts. 14-18). "I/*. 

(b) Right to freedom (Arts. 19-22). 

(c) Right against exploitation (Arts. 23-24). „ 

’ (d) Right to freedom of religion (Arts. 25-28). , 

(e) Cultural and educational rights (Arts. 29-30). 

(f) ’ Right to constitutional remedies (Arts. 32-35). 

, • The 44th Amendment' Act, 1978 has , abolished the right to property as a 
fundamental right guaranteed by Art. 19 (1) (0 and Art. 31 of the Const ilutioo. 
and hence Art. 19 (1) (f) and Art. 31 have been omitted. , , 

Fundamental rights afford protection against State action and not against 
action of private Individual.- Individual needs constitutional protection against 
the State. The rights which are given to the citizens by way of fundamental 
rights as included in Part III of the Constitution are a guarantee against State, 
action as distinguished from violation of such rights Irora private parties.; 
Private action is sufficiently protected by the ordinary law of the. land, to 
P- D. Shamdasani v. Centra! Bank of India* the petitioner, in an application 


»• A. D. M., Jabalpur v. S.Shukla. AIR t976 SC 1207. 

Mid i hat the Hih Amendment afford* protection from Slate action. 



54 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OS INDIA 


[Chap. 


. , . .. ■}■) n f .h e Constitution, sought the protection of the Court on the 

Supreme Court dismissed the petition and held : . ] 

-Neither Art. 19 (1) nor Art. 31 (11 was intended to prevent wrongful 
individual acts or to provide protection against merely private conduct.. 

The language and structure of Art. 19 and its setting in Part 111 of the Consti- 
tution clearly show that the Article was intended to protect those free- 
doms aeainst the State action other than in the legitimate exercise of its power 
to regulate private rights of property by individuals is not within the purview 
of the Articles.” »• t 'l 

■The State’ (Art. 12) : , , - 

(a) Definition.— Article 12 defines the term ‘State’ as used in different 
Articles or Part III of the Constitution. It says that unless the context other- 
wise requires the term ‘State’ includes the following '< . 

1. the Government and Parliament of India, i. e.. Executive and 

Legislature of the Union, ,, , 

2. the Government and the Legislature of each State, I. e., Executive 

and Legislature of States, 1 ' / l, / ' 

3. all local or other authorities within the territory of India, , 

4. all local and other autharities under the control of the Government 
of India. 

The term ‘State’ thus includes executive as well as the legislative organs 
of the Union and States. It is, therefore, the actions of these bodies that 
can be challenged before the courts as violating fundamental rights. 

(m) Authorities.— According to Webster’s Dictionary ‘Authority’ means a 
person or body exercising power or command.* In the context of Article 12, 
the word ‘authority’ means the power to make laws, orders, regulations, bye- 
laws, notifications, etc., which have the force of law and also power to enforce 
these laws. Thus in Kesava v. State of Mysore* it was held that the Public 
Service Commission under the Constitution did not possess even the power to 
implement its own decisions without ' referring to the State Government and 
therefore not included in the definition of ••State" under Article 12. 

(b) Local Authorities within the territory of India.— Local ‘authorities’ 
as defined in section 3 (31) of the General Clauses Act refers to authorities 
like Municipalities. District Boards, Panchayats, Improvement Trust and 
Mining Settlement Boards. In Mohammed Yastn- \. Town Area Committee ,* 
the Supreme Court held that the bye-laws of a Municipal Committee charging 
a prescribed fee on the wholesale dealer was an order by a State authority 
contravening Art. 19 (1) (g). The bye-laws in effect and in substance have 
brought about a total stoppage of the wholesale dealer s business in the com- 
mercial sense In Sri Ram v. The Notified Area Committee * a fee levied under 
section 294 of the U- P. Municipalities Act, 1919, was held to be invalid. 

1. See also Kesava v. State of Mysore, AIR 1956 Mys. 20. 

2. Ibid. _ , , 

3 AIR 1952 SC 115. See also Rashid Ahmed v. Municipal Board, Kairana, AIR 1950 
SC 163. 

4. AIR 1952 SC 111. 



frUNDAWatAt maim 


53 


a 


‘ (c) Other Mhorltles nllbla the territory ot Imtii.-In Article 12 the 

words other authorities is used after mentioDing a few of them, such as the 
Government, Parliament of India, the Government and Legislature of each of 
ine Males and all local authorities. In University of Madras V. Santa Bal, 1 
the Madras High Court held that •other authorities, can only indicate 
authorities of a like nature 'ie., ejusdem generis. So construed, it could 
only mean authorities exercising governmental or sovereign functions. It 
cannot include persons natural or juristic, such as, a University unless it is 
‘maintained by the State’. 


. But id Ujjambi v. State of U. P., a the Supreme Court rejected this res- 
trictive interpretation of the expression ‘other authorities’ given by the Madras 
High Court. It held that the ejusdem generis could not be resorted to 
in interpreting this expression. In Art. 12 the bodies specifically named are 
Government of the Union and the States, the Legislature of the Union 
and the States and local authorities. There is no common genus running 
through these named bodies nor can these bodies be placed in one single 
category on any rational basis. 

, Electricity Board, Rajasthan v. Mohan La!,* the Supreme Court has 

held that ‘other authorities' will include all authorities created by the Consti- 
tution or statute and on whom powers are conferred by law. It is not neces- 
sary, that the statutory authority should be engaged in performing govem- 
.mcntalor sovereign functions. On this interpretation the expression ‘other 
authorities’, will include Rajasthan Eelectrlcity Board 1 Cochin Dev atom 
Board,. Co-operative Society ,* which has power to make bye-laws under Co- 
operative Societies Act, 1911. The Chief Justice of a High Court is nlso 
included in tbc expression ‘other authorities’ as he has power to appoint 
ifcrV* ^5 C° url - 7 The President,® when making order under Art. 359 of 
tne^ Constitution comes within the ambit of the expression ‘other authori- 


. .In effect, the Rajasthan Electricity Board's decision* has overruled the 
decision of the Madras High Court in Santa Bat's case, bolding a University 
not to be "the State”. And finally the Patna High Court, following the 
cf c . IJ !. on of *he Supreme Court, has held that the Patna University is “the 

Mate , 10 


. In Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagalramf 1 the Supreme Court reviewed its earlier 
j™* l0ns op the meaning of the word “authorities” in Art 1 2. The majority 
ml < decision [AlaglrisnamyrJ. dissenting] held that Oil and Natural Gas Com- 
Mfe Insurance Corporation and Industrial Finance Corporation are ‘autho- 
nues within the meaning of Art. 12 of the Constitution and therefore they 


*' AIR 1954 Mad 67. s« also Devdas v. Karnaul Eng Inter in* Collet*. AIR 1964 My*. 

* • K ri*hna Copat v. Punjab University, AtR 1966 Punj. 34. 
j* AIR 1962 SC 1621. 

*■ A1R 1967 SC 1857, followed in Utnesh v. V. N. Sin*h. AtR 1968 Pal- 3. 
j D *«»c>!y Board, Rajaslhan v. Mohan La!. AIR 1967 SC 1857. 

• P. B. M. Nimboodripad v. Cochin Devasom Board. AtR 1956 TC 19. 

• ITuthonm v. Co-operative Agricultural Association, AtR 1961 MP 289. 

• Parmatra, Saran v. Chief Justice, AIR 1964 Raj. 13. 

• Harootha! v. State. AIR 1967 Cuj. 229. 

* AIRjnosc 1SJ7 

tl ’* V ' N - Sir -« h - AIR 1968 Pat 3. 

‘I- AIR inter,.,, 


56 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


are ’State’. The rules and Regulations framed by the/ibove bjJiei ihtvj the 
force of law. The employees of these statutory bodies have a statutory 
status and they are entitled to declaration of being in employment iwhea 
their dismissal or removal is in contravention of statutory provisions. The 
employees are entitled to claim protection of Aits. 14 and 16 against the 
Corporation. 

It means that the ‘authorities’ not created by the Constitution or 
by a Statute can not be a State within the meaning of Art. 12 of the Consti- 
tution. 

Thus, a society registered under the Societies Registration Act (e. g., the 
Council of Scientific and the Industrial Research) is not an authority witbin 
the meaning of Article 12. The society does not have a statutory character 
like the Oil and Natural Gas Commission or the Life Insurance Corporation 
or Industrial Finance Corporation. 1 A company registered under Indian 
Companies Act is not a State within the meaning of Art. 12 of the Consti- 
tution. 

(d) Authorities under tbe control of the Government of India. — Dy wofds 
’authorities under control of the Government of India’, it is meant to bring 
into the definition of State all areas outside Indian territory but which are 
under or may come under the control of the Government of India, such as. 
mandatory or trustee territories. Such a territory may come under India’s 
control by International agreement. Thus even such areas will be the subject 
to Part III and the inhabitants of such areas may also claim the benefit of 
Fundamental Rights guaranteed in Part III. 4 

Is Judiciary included In the word ’‘State”?— In the United States it Is 
well settled that the judiciary is within the prohibition of the 14th Amend- 
ment.* The judiciary, though not expressly mentioned in Art. 12 should be held 
to be included witbin the expression ’other authorities’ since courts are set up 
by statute and exercise power conferred by law.* It is suggested that discri- 
mination may be brought about. .even (by) judiciary and the inhibition of 
Art. 14 extends to all actions of the State denying equal protection of the 

laws whether it be the action of any one of the three limbs of the State 

Y/hat may superficially appear to be an unequal application of the law may 
not necessarily amount to denial of equal protection of law unless there is 
shown to be present in it an element of International and purposeful discri- 
mination. 

Tbe question whether the judiciary was included within the definition of 
’the State’ in Art. 12 arose for consideration of the Supreme Court in Naresh 
v. State of Maharashtra .* It was held that even if a court is the State a writ 
under Art. 32 cannot be issued to a High Court of competent jurisdiction 
against its judicial orders, because such orders cannot be said to violate the 
fundamental rights. The Court did not express any categorical opinion on the 
question. Mr. H. M. Seervai is of opinion that the judiciary is included in 
the definition of ’the State* and a judge acting as a judge is subject to the writ 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. 8 The courts, like any other organ of tbe 


Sabhaji Tewari v. Union of India, AtR 1973 SC 1329. 

C. A. D., Vol. Vlt. p. 007. 5« alio Mauati Saheb Chief Commissioner, AlR 
1%) SC 531. 

Viffina v. Rives. <1!80) 100 US 313. 318 : 25 L. Ed. 667. 

Dr. V. N. Shuk la— Constitution of India, 3th Ed., p. 20. 

AtR 1967 SCI. 

II. M. Seervai— Constitutional Law of India, 1*1 Ed-, p. 155. 



FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS 


57 


7J.i 


State, are limited by the mandatory provisions of th; Constitution and they 
.can hardly be allowed to override the fundamental rights under the shield 
that they have within their jurisdiction, the right to make an erroneous 
decision. 1 2 3 * * 

* Laws inconsistent with Fundamental Rights (Art 13).— Article 13(1) dec- 
lares that all laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution shall be void to the extent to which 
they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part III of the Constitution. 
Clause (2) of this Article provides that the State shall not make any law which 
takes away or abridges the fundamental rights conferred by Part in of the Con- 
stitution; and any law made in contravention of fundamental rights shall to the 
extent of contravention, void. Clause (3) of this Article gives the term law’ a 
very broad connotation which Includes any ordinance, order, bye-iaw, rule, 
regulation, notification, custom or usage having the force of law. Thus not 
only the Legislative enactments, but anything mentioned here can be challenged 
as infringing a fundamental right. 

i i’ower of Judicial Review.— Article 13 in fact provides for the ‘judicial 
review’ of all legislations in India, past as well as future. .This power has 
been conferred on the High Courts and the Supreme Court of India which can 
declare a law unconstitutional if it is inconsistent with any of the provisions of 
Part III of the Constitution. 

Meaning and bisis of Judicial Review.— ‘Judicial Review* is the power of 
courts to pronounce upon the constitutionality of legislative acts which fall 
within their normal jurisdiction to enforce and the power to refuse to enforce 
such as they find to be unconstitutional and hence void. 1 

> “Judicial Review” said Khanna, J., in the Fundamental Rights Cure, 8 
“has thus become an integral part of our Constitutional System and a power 
has been vested in the High Courts and the Supreme . Court to decide about 
the constitutional validity of the provisions of statutes. If the provisioos of 
the statutes arc found to be violative of any Article of the Constitution, which 
is the touchstone for the validity of all laws, the Supreme Court and the High 
Courts are empowered to strike down the said provisions.” 

That power corrupts a man and absolute power corrupts absolutely which 
ultimately leads to tyranny, anarchy and, ebaos has been sufficiently established 
in course of evolution of human history, and all round attempts have been 
made to erect institutional limitations on its exercise When Montesque give 
his doctrine of separation of powers, he was obviously moved by his desire to 
put a curb on absolute and uncontrollable power in any one organ of the 
Government. A legislature, an executive and a judicial power Comprehend the 
whole of what is meant and understood by Government. It is by balancing 
each of these two powers against the other two that the efforts in human nature 
towards tyranny can alone be checked and restrained and any freedom preserved 
in the Constitution. 1 

Judicial review is thus the interposition of judicial restraint on the legisla- 
tive as well as the executive organs of the Government. The concept has the 

1. Basu— Commentary on ibe Constitution of India. 5th Ed., p. 145. 

2. Crown E. S. : Essay on the Judicial Review in Encyclopaedia of Social Sciences, VoL 

VIII, p. 4J7. 

3. Kethivanmd v. State of Kerala. AIR 1973 SC 1441. 

A. Letters hy James Adams to Richard Henry. 

Const.— 8 



58 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


origin in the theory of limited Government and in the theory of two laws— an 
ordinary and supreme (that is the Constitution). From the very assumption 
that there is a supreme law which constitutes the foundation and source of 
other legislative authorities in the body politics, it proceeds that any act of the 
ordinary law-making bodies which contravenes the provisions of the supreme 
law, must be void and there must be some organ which is' to possess' the power 
or authortiy to pronounce such regulative acts void.’ 

The doctrine of judicial review was for the first time propounded by the 
Supreme Court of America. Originally, the United States Constitution did not 
contain an express provision for judicial review. The power of judicial review 
was, however, assumed by the Supreme Court of America in the historic case 
of Marbury v. Madison.' 1 The facts of the case were as follows : The Federalists 
had lost the election of 180t), but before leaving the office they had succeeded 
in creating several new judicial posts. Among these were 42 justices of peace, 
to which the retiring Federalists President, John Adams appointed forty-two 
Federalists. The appointment of commissions were confirmed by the Senate 
and they were signed and sealed, but Adam’s Secretary of State, John Marshall, 
failed to deliver certain of them. When the new President, Thomas Jefferson, 
assumed office, he instructed bis Secretary of State, James Madison, not to 
deliver seventeen of these commissions including one for William Marbury. 
Marbury fried a petition fn the Supreme Court for the issue of a writ of 
mandamus to Secretary Madison ordering him to deliver the commissions. He 
retied on section 31 of the Judiciary Act of 1789 which provided “The Sup- 
reme Court...shall have the power to issue...writs of mandamus, in cases 
warranted by the principles and usages of law, to... persons holding office, 
under the authority of the United States.” The Court, speaking through 
Marshall, who had now become Chief Justice, held that section 13 of the Judi- 
ciary Act was repugnant to Art. Ill, Section 2 of the Constitution inasmuch as 
the Constitution itself limited the Supreme Court’s original jurisdiction to cases 
“affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, and those to 
which a State is party"— Since Marbury fell in none of these categories the 
court had no jurisdiction in his case. The observations of Marshall, C. J., in 
that case are pertinent to note : 


"The Constitution is either superior paramount law unchangeable by 
ordinary means or it is on a level with ordinary legislative Acts, and like 
other Acts, is alterable when the legislature shall please to alter it...Ccrtainly 
all those who framed written constitutions contemplate them as forming the 
fundamental and paramount law of the nation and, consequently the theory 
of every such Government must be that an Act of the legislature repugnant 
lo lit Contttulionii void. And renter, 'll is cmphati tally the Province 
and duty or the Judicial department to say what the law is. . . 

In the Indian Constitution there is express provision for judicial review. 

America. I„ the 

amre of Madras v. V. C. Row, 3 Patanjali Sastii, C. J., observed : 

i„ ... ‘P ur Constitution contains express provisions for judicial review of 
legislation as to ns conformity with the Constitution unlike in America 


z 


Commentaries 
2L ed_ 60. 

JllR loss tr IU 


Conn notion of India, Vot. I. 



7]' 


FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS 


59 


Fourteenth Amendments. If then, the courts in this country face up to such 
important and none too easy task, it is not out of any desire to tilt at legislative 
authority in a crusader’s spirit, but in discharge of duty plainly laid upon 
them by the Constitution. This is specially true as regards the fundamental 
rights as to which this Court has been assigned the role of sentinel on the qui 
rive." ' *' 

But even in the absence of the provisions of judicial review, the courts 
would have been able to invalidate a law which contravened any constitutional 
provisions, for, such power of judicial review follows from the very nature of 
constitutional law. In A. K. Gopalan v. State of Madras* Kama, d J. pointed 
out that it , was only by way of abundant caution that the framers of our 
Constitution inserted the specific provisions in Art. 13. He observed : 

• , "In India.it is tbe Constitution that is supreme and that a statute law 
to be valid, must be in all conformity with the constitutional requirements and 
it is for the judiciary to decide whether any enactment is constitutional or 
not." 

-v But while the basis of judicial review of legislative acts is far more secure 
under our Constitution than in the United States, its potentialities are much 
more limited. This is due to the detailed provisions of the Indian Constitution 
and the easy method of its amendments in contradistinction to the American 
Constitution’s vague and general phraseology and the rigid method of its 
amendments. 

Thus under this power of judicial review tbe highest Court of the Nation 
can test all pre-Constitution and post-Constitution or future laws, and declare 
them unconstitutional in case they contravene any of tbe provisions of Part III 
of the Constitution. 

* ' In Keshavananda Bharti's case* it has been held, that Judicial Review is 
one of the ‘basic features’ of the. Indian Constitution and therefore cannot be 
taken away by amending the Constitution under Article 368 of the Constitution. 

However, the recent constitutional developments would have far-reaching 
consequences on the scope of the power of, judicial review exercised by our 
High Courts and the Supreme Court. 

. In Smt. Indira Sehru Gandhi v. Raj Narcin* the validity of Art. 329-A 
(4) and (5) which was added by the Constitution (39th Amendment) Act, I *75, 
was challenged on the ground ‘ inter alia ’ that it takes away the power of 
judicial review which is one ‘of the 'basic features’ of our Constitution. By 
this amendment the election dispute of the appellant pending in the High Court 
of Allahabad was declared valid. The High Conrt had declared the election 
of tbe appellant to the Lok Sabha invalid on the ground of corrupt practice 
at election. Though the clause has been struck down by the Court, but some 
of the judges have made startling observations. Ray, C. J., said “when the 
constituent body exercises powers, the constituent power comprehends legisla- 
tive, executive and judicial powers. All powers flow from tbe constituent 
power. . . . ...The constituent power is independent of the doctrine of separation 
of powers. The constituent power is sovereign. It is the power which creates 

J. AIR 1950 SC 27. 

2. AIR 1973 SC 1461. 

3. AIR 1973 SC 2299. Also see Tbe Habeas Corpus case, AIR 1976 SC 1207 aad the 
Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976. 



58 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


Grinin in the Theory ofli railed Government and in the theory of two laws— an 
ordinary and supreme (that is the Constitution). From the very assumption 
that there is a supreme law which constitutes the foundation and source of 
other legislative authorities in the body politics, it proceeds that any act of the 
ordinary law-making bodies which contravenes the provisions of the supreme 
law, must be void and there must be some organ which is to possess - the power 
or authortiy to pronounce such regislative acts void.’ 

The doctrine of judicial review was for the first time propounded by the 
Supreme Court of America. Originally, the United States Constitution did not 
contain an express provision for judicial review. The power of judicial review 
was. however, assumed by the Supreme Court of America in the historic case 
of Marbury v. Madison.' 1 2 The facts of the case were as follows : The Federalists 
had lost the election of 1800, but before leaving the ofFice they had succeeded 
in creating several new judicial posts. Among these were 42 justices of peace, 
to which the retiring Federalists President, John Adams appointed forty-two 
Federalists. The appointment of commissions were confirmed by the Senate 
and they were signed and sealed, but Adam’s Secretary of State, John Marshall, 
failed to deliver certain of them. When the new President, Thomas Jefferson, 
assumed office, he instructed his Secretary of State, James Madison, not to 
deliver seventeen of these commissions including one for William Marbury. 
Marbury filed a petition in the Supreme Court for the issue of a writ of 
mandamus to Secretary Madison ordering him to deliver the commissions. ’He 
relied on section 31 of the Judiciary Act of 1789 which provided "The Sup- 
reme Court. ..shall have the power to issue... writs of mandamus, in cases 
warranted by the principles and usages of law, to...persons holding office, 
under the authority of the United States.” The Court, speaking through 
Marshall, who had now become Chief Justice, held that section 13 of the Judi- 
ciary Act was repugnant to Art. Ill, Section 2 of the Constitution inasmuch as 
the Constitution itself limited the Supreme Court’s original jurisdiction to cases 
"affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, and those to 
which a State is party”— Since Marbury fell in none of these categories the 
court had no jurisdiction in his case. The observations of Marshall, C. J., in 
that case are pertinent to note : , 


"The Constitution is either superior paramount law unchangeable by 
ordinary means or it is on a level with ordinary legislative Acts, and like 
other Acts, is alterable when the legislature shall please to alter it...Certain!y 
all those who framed written constitutions contemplate them as forming the 
fundamental and paramount law of the nation and, consequently the theory 
of every such Government must be that an Act of the legislature repugnant 
to the Constitution is void. And further, 'It is emphatically the province 
and duty of the Judicial department to say what the law is ” , 


In the Indian Constitution there is express provision for judicial review, 
and in this sense it is on a more solid footing than it is in America. In the 
State of Madras v. V. G. Raw, 3 Pataojali Sastri, C. J., observed : 


"Our Constitution contains express provisions for judicial review of 
legislation as to its conformity with the Constitution, unlike in America 
where the Supreme Court has assumed extensive powers of reviewing legislative 
acts under cover of the widely interpreted ‘due process' clause in the Fifth and 


1. Buu's Commentaries on Conilitutioo of India, Vo I I 

2. 2 L. ed. 60. 

3. AIR 1952 SC 196. 



•7j- 


FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS 


61 


declared unconstitutional then a question arises whether the whole of the statute 
is to be declared void or only that part which is unconstitutional should be 
declared as such. To resolve this problem the Supreme Court has devised the 
doctrine of severability or separability. This doctrine means that if - an offend- 
ing provision i can t be separated from that .which is constitutional then only 
that part which is offending is to be declared as void and not the entire Statute- 
Article 13 of the Constitution uses (he words "to the extent of such inconsis- 
tency be void” which means that when some provision of the law is held to be 
unconstitutional then only the repugnant provisions of the law in question 
shall be treated by courts as void and not the whole statute. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 

1 In A. K. Gopalan v. State of Madras , a the Supreme Court while, declaring 
section 14 of the Preventive Detention Act, 1950, as ultra vires, observed : 

' "The' impugned Act 'minus this section can remain 'unaffected. The 
omission of the section will not change the nature or the structure of the subject 
of the legislation. Therefore, the decision that section 14 is ultra vires, does 
'not affect the validity, of the rest of the Act. Similarly, in State of Bombay v. 
Bahara, a case under Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949' it was observed that the 
provisions which have been declared as void do not affect the entire statute, 
therefore, there is no necessity for declaring the entire statute as invalid." * 

•i This is, however, subject to one exception. If the valid portion is 
so closely mixed up with invalid portion that it cannot be separated without 
leaving an incomplete or more or less mingled remainder, that the coarts will 
hold the entire Act void. The primary test is whether what remains' is so 
inextricably mixed with the part declared iavalid , that what remains cannot 
Survive independently. 8 1 The Supreme Court observed in Ramesh Thappar v. 
State of Madras ,* that'.* ' 1 ‘ 

"Where a law purports to authorise the imposition of restrictions on a 
fundamental Right in language wide enough to cover restrictions, both within 
and without the limits prvoided by the Constitution and where it is possible to 
separate the two,‘the whole law is to be struck down. So long as the possibility 
of its beiDg applied for purposes not sanctioned by' the Constitution cannot be 
ruled out, it must bt held to be wholly void." 1 „ ' * ' ’ ( ‘ ‘ 

• The doctrine of severability was elaborately considered in R. M. D. C. v. 
Union of India.* Where Sec. 2 (d) of the Prize .Competitions Act,- which was 
broad enough to include competitions of a gambling nature as well as compe- 
titions involving skill, was involved.- The Supreme Court held that the provi- 
sions of the Act were severable and struck down only those provisions which 
related to competition involving skill. The Court thus in effect modified It! 
observation made in Ramesh Thappar' s case,® where it was said that when an 
offending provision is couched in a language wide enough to cover restrictions 
both witbin and without the constitutionally permissible limits, it cannot be 
separated if there is possibility of its being applied for purposes not sanctioned 
by the Constitution. The Court in R. M. D. C. case 1 held that where after 

1. Q«im Rjxvi v. State of Hyderabad, 1953 SCR 589. 

2. AiRwoscwimosam.;,,, , 

3. Slat* of Bihar v. Karoethwar Sinah, AIR 1952 SC 252. , 

4. AIR 1950 SC 124. See also Chintaman Rao v. State of M. P., AIR 1951 SC 118. ~ 

5. AIR 1957 SC 628. 

6. AIR 1950 SC 124. 

7. AIR 1957 SC «S. 



(Chap. 


. . his submission is that 

Parliament can exercise judicial function even without amending the Constitu- 
tion. U is submitted thatthis submission is not correct. 1 


Pre-Constltntion Laws.— According to clause (I) of Article 13 all pre- 
Constitution or existing laws, l. e.. Jaws which were in force immediately before 
the commencement of the Constitution shall be void to the extent to which 
they are inconsistent with Fundamental Rights from the date or the commence- 
ment of the Constitution. 


Article 13 not retrospect We in effect.— Article 13 (1) is prospective in 
nature. All pre-Coostitution laws inconsistent with a Fundamental Right . will 
become void only after the commencement of the Constitution. They are not 
void ab initio. Such inconsistent law is not wiped out so far as the past Acts 
are concerned. A declaration of invalidity by the Courts will, however, be 
necessary to make the laws invalid. The Supreme Court in Keshava A (adava 
A fenon v. State of Bombay ,* observed : 


‘"There is no Fundamental Right that a person shall not be prosecuted 
and punished for an offence committed before the Constitution came into 
force So far as the past Acts are concerned the law exists notwithstanding 
that it does not exist with respect to the future exercise of the Fundamental 
Right.” 

In that case, a prosecution proceeding was started against the petitioner 
under the Press (Emergency Powers) Act, 1931 in respect of a pamphlet pub- 
lished in 1949. The present Constitution came into force during the pendency 
of the proceeding in the court. The appellant contended that the Act was 
inconsistent with the Fundamental Right conferred by Art. 19 (1) (a) of the 
Constitution hence void, and the proceeding against him could not be conti- 
nued. The Supreme Court held that Art. 13 (1) could not apply to his case 
as the offence was committed before the present Constitution came into force 
and therefore the proceedings started against him in 1949 was not affected. 
The Supreme Court held that j 


“As the Fundamental Rights become operative only on and from the • 
date of the Constitution, the question of the inconsistency of the existing laws 

with those rights must arise from the date those rights came into being 

The voidness of the existing law is limited to the future exercise of Fundamental 
Rights. Article 13 (1) cannot be read as obliterating the entire operation 
of the inconsistent laws, or to wipe them out altogether from the Statute Book, 
for to do so will be to give them retrospective effect which, we have said, they 
do not possess.” 

1 This does not mean' that a discriminatory procedure laid down ' by 'a 
pre-Constituiion Act is to be followed in respect of pending proceedings or in 
respect of new proceedings started in respect of pre-Constitution rights or Uabi- 
*'“**•■ ' J Though the substantive rights and liabilities acquired or accrued before 
date of the Constitution remain enforceable, nobody can claim his rights 
and liabilities to be enforced under a particular procedure which becomes 
inconsistent with Fundamental Rights.® - ■ - ) 

Doctrine of Severability w Separability. — When a part of the statute is 


1. Ibid See Beg, J's observations. 11 

2. AlRWSlSCm. See also Rabindra Nath v. Union of Inin, AIR 1970 SC470, 
?• Uchmandas v, State of Bombay. AIR l9i2^C 255. 


FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS 


63 


7 } ; 


stitution. If State makes such a law then it will be ultra vires and void to the 
extent of the contravention. It is a still boro law and cannot be revived by 
removal of the constitutional prohibition by subsequent amendment of the 
Constitution. Though post-Constitulion laws inconsistent with fundamental 
rights are void from their very inception, yet a declaration by the Court of 
their invalidity will be necessary. 1 And again the court docs not grant A 
declaration in respect of invalidity of' law, except at the instance of a person 
who is possessed of a fundamental right and whose right has been infringed,* 
but not at the instance of mere volunteers. 8 

-• As distinguished from clause (I), clause (2) makes the inconsistent laws 
void ab initio and even convictions made under such unconstitutional taws sh3ll 
have to be set aside. "Anything done under such a law, whether closed, com- 
pleted or inchoate will be wholly illegal and any person adversely affected by 
it will be entitled to relief." 4 

Does the doctrine of eclipse apply to a post-Cooslitution law ? 

• In Deep Chand v State of U. P.f the matter was fully cosidered by the 
Supreme Court. According to the majority view under Art. 13 (2) no law 
can be made in the post-Consiitution period so as to contarvene the funda- 
mental right and such a law if made, is nullity from its inception, and is a still 
born law. It is void ab initio. The doctrine of eclipse does not apply to post- 
constitutional laws and therefore a subsequent constitutional amendment 
cannot revive it. . The minority however, expressed the view that the doctrine 
of eclipse is applicable even to a post-Constitution law. 

In Mahendra Lai Jain v. State of U. P.° the Supreme Court approved 
the majority view expressed in Deep Chard's case. It was held that the doctrine 
of eclipse applies only to pre-Coostitution law under Art. 13 (1) and not to 
post-Constitution laws under Art. 13 (2). There is a clear distinction between 
pre-Constitution and post-Constitution laws. The voidness of the pre-Consti- 
tution laws is nftt from its inception but only from the date of the commence- 
ment of the Constitution. On the other hand, the voidness of a post-Consti- 
tutional Law is from its very inception and such a law cannot therefore exist 
for any purpose. In that case, the U. P. Land Tenures (Regulation of Transfers) 
Act, 1932, was declared uncostitutional as it cotravened Art. 13 (2) of the 
Constitution and could not therefore be revived by the operation of doctrine of 
Eclipse by a subsequent enactment of Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act. 

It could only be re-enacted. 

But, in State of Gujarat v. Sri Amblca Mills' the Supreme Court has modi- 
fied its view as expressed in Deep Chand' s case and Mahendra Lai Jain's case 
and held that a post-Constitution law which is inconsistent with fundamental 
rights is not nullity or non-existent in all cases and for all purposes. The 
doctrine of absolute nullity is not a universal rule and there are many excep- 
tions to it. A post-Constitution law which takes away or abridges the right 

t. Md- lahaq V, Sure, AtR t9«t Atl. 522. 

2. Chiranjit Lai v. Union of India, AIR 1951 SC 41 : 1950 SCR £69. 

3. Pischim Ben*. Mai tali Cycle Mudoor Union v. Commissioner of Police. Calcutta. 

AIR 1961 C*I. 125. 

4. Deep Chand v. Suie of U. P, AIR 1939 SC MS. 

5. AIR 1969 SC MS- 

6. AIR 1963 SC 1019. 

7. AIR 1974 SC 1300- 



62 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


removing the invalid provision what remains constitutes a complete Code there 
is no necessity to declare the whole Act ultra vires. In such cases the deter- 
mining factor is the intention of the Legislature. But if what remains on the 
statute book cannot be enforced without making alteration the whole Act 
should be declared as void. Severability is the question of substance and not of 
form, and in determining the intention of the Legislature it is legitimate to 
take into account the history of the legislation and the object as well as the 
title and Preamble. In taxation laws where taxes are imposed, on subjects 
which are divisible in nature and some of the subjects are exempt from taxa- 
tion the taxation statute will not be wholly void. It can be declared void 
only with regard to those subjects to which a constitutional exemption is 
attracted. 1 2 3 

Doctrine of Eclipse.— The doctrine of eclipse is based on the principle 
that a law which violates Fundamental Rights is not nullity or void ab initio 
but becomes only unenforceable, I. e., remains in a moribund condition. *'It is 
over-shadowed by the fundamental rights and remains dormant, but it is not 
dead”. 1 Such laws are not wiped out entirely from the statute book. They 
exist for all past transactions, and for the enforcement of rights acquired and 
liabilities incurred before the present Constitution came into force and for 
determination of right of persons who have not been given fundamental rights 
by the Constitution, e. g. non-citizens * It is only as against the citizens 
that they remained in a dormant or moribund condition but they remain 
in operation as against non-citizeos who are not entitled to fundamental 
rights. 4 5 6 ' 

Can such a law, which becomes unenforceable after the Constitution came 
into force, be again revived and be made effective by an amendment in the 
Constitution 7 

It was to solve this problem that the Sjpreme Court formulated the 
doctrine or eclipse in Bhikaji v. State of Al. PS In that case a provision of 
C. P. and Berar Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Act, 1947, authorised 
the State Government to take up the entire motor transport business 
in the Province to the exclusion of motor transport operations. This 
provision, though valid when enacted, became void on the coming into 
force of the Constitution in 1950, as they violated Art. 19 (l).(g) 8 of the 
Constitution. However, in 1951, Clause (6) of Art. 19 was amended by the 
Constitution (First Amendment) Act, so as to authorise the Government to 
monopolise any business. The Supreme Court held that the effect of the 
Amendment was ’to remove _ the shadow and to make the impugned Act free 
from all blemish or infirmity’. It becomes enforceable against citizens as 
well as non-citizens after the constitutional impediment is removed. This 
law was merely eclipsed for the time being by the fundamental rights. As 
soon as the eclipse is removed the law begins to operate from the date of such 
removal. 

^ Tost-Coastitatioa Lam. — Clause (2) of Art. 13 prohibits State to make 
any law which takes away or abridges rights conferred by Part III of the Con- 

1. State of Bombay v. United Motors, (1954) 4 SCR 1069. 

2. Bhikaji Narayan v. M. P., AIR 1955 SC 78t. 

3. Keshav Madhava Menon v. State of Bombay, AIR 1951 SC J 28 at p. 599-600. 

4. State of Gujarat v. Sri Ambica Mills. AIR 1974 SC 1300. 

5. AIR 1953 SC 781. 

6. Right to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business. 



7] " 


FUNDAMENTAL RJ0HT3 


65 


Law and Law ui IbrM .-For the purposes of Art. 13 “Law” is defined 
ns including any Ordinance, Order, bye-law, regulation, notification custom 
or usage having the force of law. The definition of -law' in this Article is 
wider than the ordinary connotation of law which refers to enacted law iw 
legislation. It includes even the administrative order issued bv an esecutise 
officer, 1 but does not include administrative directions or instructions issued 
by the Government for the guidance of its officers.’ It does not include 
departmental instructions. Departmental instructions are neither "law” 
within Ibe meaning of Article 13 (3) (9) nor are they “procedure established bv 
law without the meaning of Article 21. Though the term “law” includes 
all 'laws in force i e.. custom.’ usage, etc. having the Torce of law. personal 
laws of Hindus, Muslims and Christians are excluded from the definition nr 
“law” for the purpose of this Article. 4 1 

'Law in force’ denote all prior and existing laws passed by the Legislature 
or other competent authority which have not been repealed notwithstanding 
the fact that they are not in operation wholly or in part throughout India or 
part thereof. The term ’existing law’ includes a wider range, such as ordi 
nance, orders, bye-laws, rules or regulations by Legislature or other authorised 
body or person. Thus an Ordinance issued by the President/ or the Gover 
nors/ a Government notification, 7 a bye-law of a municipal body are all laws 


The term 'having the force or law’ means rule of conduct enforceable in 
a court of law. In order that a particular rule or conduct should be called a 
law it must be established that it has a force of law. 


Is constitutional amendment a ‘law’ nnder Article 13 (2) ?— The question 
whether the word ‘law’ in clause (2) of Art. 13 includes a 'constitutional 
amendment was for the first time considered by the Supreme Court in Shankari 
Prasad v. The Union of India / In that case the validity of the Constitution 
(First Amendment) Act, 1951, which introduced the new Arts. 3I-A and 31-B 
was involved. The Court held that the word ‘law’ in chase (2) does not include 
law made by Parliament under Art. 368. The word 'law’ in Art. 13 must be 
taken to mean rules or regulations made in exercise of ordinary legislative 
power and not amendments to the Constitution made in exercise of constitu- 
tional power and therefore. Art. 13 (2) does not affect amendments made under 
Art. 368. This interpretation of the Shankari Prasad's case was followed by the 
majority (Hidayatullah and Mudholkar, JJ.. dissenting) in Ibe case of Saiian 
Singh v. Stale of Rajasthan . lo 


Butin Golak Nath v. State of Punjab -,** the Supreme Court overruled 


1. Jeshiogbhal v. Emperor, AIR 1950 Bom. 363 ; D. Birunni v. State AIR 19<Si 

Ker 52 ; Dwaika Nath v. State of Bihar, AIR 1939 SC 249 : Vajodeo’v State or 
Mjsore.AIR 1966 Mys.92. e 1 

2. Stale of West Bcr.nl v. Anwar Ali. AIR 1952 SC 73. 


3. D. B. M . Patent v. State of A. P„ AIR 1974 S- C. 2092. 

4. Bhan Rum v. Baijaath, AIR 1962 S. C. 1476. 

3. Ankle 123. 

6. Article 213. 


7. Ramlishan Dalmia *. Justice Tcndotkar, AIR 1958 SC 338. . 

8. Vasia v. Town Area Committee, AIR 1932 SC 113. 


9. AIR 1931 SC 458. 
10. AIR l r <63 SC 843. 
1|. AIR 1967 SC 164J. 


Const.— 9 



64 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


(ChAP. 


conferred by Art. 19 'will be operative as regards to non citizens because 
fundamental rights are not available to noo-citizens. Such a law will become 
void or non existent only against citizens because fundamental rights are 
Conferred on them. The voidness’ in Art. 13 (2) can only mean' void as against 
persons whose fundamental rights are taken • away or abridged by daw. 
Non-citizens cannot take advantage of the voidness of the law. The reasons why 
a post-constitution law remains operative as against non-citizens is , that it is 
void only to the extent of its inconsistency with rights conferred on citizens, 
namely, rights under Art. 19. * - 1 * 

Accordingly, the Court held that the Bombay i Labour Welfare Fund Act, 
1953 was valid as respect to non-citizens. .The respondent, a company, had 
challenged the validity of the Act on the ground that its provisions violated the 
fundamental right of citizen employers and cmplojees, and therefore they 
were void under Art. 13 (2) of the Constitution. It was held that even 
assuming that under Art. 226 a company which was not a citizen was entitled 
to move the High Court and seek a remedy for infiiDgement of its ordinary 
right to property, the provisions of the Bombay Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1953 
were not non est but were valid laws enacted by a competent legislature as 
respects non-citizens and the company could not take the plea that its right 
to property were being taken or abridged without the authority of laws. . . 

Doctrine of Waiver.— Can a citizen waive his fundamental right ? The 
doctrine of waiver can have 1 no application to the provisions of law enshrined 
iri 1 Part III of the Constitution. It is not optn to an accused person to waive 
or give up his constitutional rights and get convicted.*' ' 

The question of waiver directly arose in Bashesher Nath v. Income Tax 
Commissioner. 3 The petitioner whose case was lefened to the Income-tax 
Investigation Commission under section 5 (1) of the Act was found to have 
concealed a large amount of income. He, thereupon, agreed as a settlement 
in 1954 to pay Rs. 3 lakhs in monthly instalments by way of pr rears of tax and 
penalty. In 1955 the Supreme Court in Muihiah v. I. T. Commissioner, A- I. R- 
1956 S. C. 269 held that section 5 (1) of the Taxation of Income (Investigation 
Commission) Act was ultra vires of Art. 14. The petitioner then challenged the 
settlement between him and the Income Tax Investigation Commission. The 
respondent contended that even if section 5 (1) was invalid, the petitioner by 
entering into an agreement to pay the tax had waived his fundamental right 
guaranteed under Art. 14. 

The majority expressed the view that the doctrine of waiver as formulat- 
ed by some American Judges in interpreting the American Constitution 
cannot be applied in interpreting the Indian Constitution. ' The Court held 
that it is not open to a citizen to waive any of the fundamental rights conferred 
by Part III of the Constitution. These rights have been put in the Constitu- 
tion not merely for the benefit of the individual but as a matter of public 
policy for the benfit of the general public. It is an obligation imposed 
upon the State by the Constitution. No person can relieve the State of this 
obligation, because a large majority of our people are economically poor, 
educationally backward and politically not yet conscious of their rights. In 
such circumstances, it is the duty of this Court to protect their rights against 
themselves.® 

I. Behram v. State of Bombay, AIR 1955 SC 145. 

Z AIR 1959 SC 149. 

3. Bashesher Nath v. Income-tax Commissioner, AIR 1959 SC 149, per Subba Rao, 3. 



5 s 

Hi^ht to Equality 
(Arts. 14 to 18) 

Introduction- Articles 14 Jo 18 of the Constitution guarantee the right 
to equality to every citizen of Indi3. Article 14 embodies the general prin- 
ciples of equality before law and prohibits any discrimination on grounds of 
religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth between citizens. Article 14 embo- 
dies the idea of equality expressed in the Preamble. The succeeding Articles 
15, 16, 17 and 18 lay down specific application of the general rules laid down 
in Art. 14. Article 15 relates to prohibition of discrimination on grounds of 
religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. Article 16 guarantees equality of 
opportunity in matters of public employment. Article 17 abolishes ‘Untouch- 
ability*. Article 18 abolishes titles. 

Equality before the Law and Eqml Protection of Laws (Art. 14) 

Article 14 declares that 'the State shall not deny to any person equality 
before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of 
India*. Thus Art. 14 uses two expressions “equality before the law’ and "equal 
protection of the laws”. The phrase "equality before the law" finds a place 
in almost all written Constitutions that guarantee fundamental rights. 1 Both 
these expressions have, however, been used in the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights.* 

The first expression ‘equality before law, is of English origin and the 
second expression has been taken from the American Constitution. Both 
these expressions aim at establishing what is called ‘equality of status' in the 
Preamble of the Constitution. While both the expressions may seem to be 
identical, they do not convey the same meaning. While ‘equality before the 
law* is a somewhat negative concept implying the absence of any special 
privilege in favour of individuals and the equal subjection of all classes to the 
ordinary law. “Equal protection of the law" is a more positive concept 
implying equality of treatment in equal circumstances. 8 However, one domi- 
nant idea common to both the expressions is that or equal justice. 4 In State 
of {Vest Bengal v. Anwar All Sarkar* Patanjali Sastri. C. J., has rightly observed 
that the second expression is a corollary of the first and it is difficult to imagine 
a situation in which the violation of the equal protection of laws will cot be 
the violation of the equality before l3w. Thus, in substance the two expressions 
mean one and the same thing. 

f. WX — Section f of ftfh XroetKSneiu’says "So Sate staff, .nfcny to any person wriiih 
its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws." 

Burros— Section U **A1I citizens irrespective of birth, religion, ses or race are equal 
before law, that b to say, there shall not be toy arbitrary discrimination between one 
citizen or class of citizens and another-** 

Eire — Section <0 (1) 'All citizen* shall, as human persons be held eqnsl before law.* 

Chile — Art. to *AU inhsbitants of the Republic are assured equality before the law.* 

3. Art. 7 of the Human Declaration of Human Rifhls My* t “All are equal before the 
law acd are entitled without any diacriminatioa to equal protection of the law.** 

3. Dicey— la w of the Conttitution, 1 0th Ed., p. 43. 

4. Sheoahanktr v. M. P. State. AIR 1<>J1 N a spur SS (F. R.). See also D**y, 19^ Eda., 

P- 4 ?. 

5. AIR19S2SC7J. 



66 


CONSTH UTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap, 


the decisions given in the aforesaid cases. Delivering the majority judgment, 
Subbarao, C. J., held that : “The word ‘law’ in Art. 13 (2) includes every 
branch of law, statutory, constitutional, etc., and hence, if amendment to 
the Constitution takes away or abridges fundamental right, the amendment 
would be void.” 

The Constitution (24th Amendment) Act, 1971. — In ‘order to remove the 
difficulty created by the Supreme Court’s decision in Golak Nath's case the 
Constitution (24th Amendment) Act, 1971 was enacted. By this amendment a 
new clause (clause 4) was added to Art. 13 of the Constitution which provides 
that “Nothing in this Article shall apply to any amendment of this Constitution 
made under Art. 368.” In other words, constitutional amendments passed under 
Art. 368 shall not be considered as ‘Jaw’ within the meaning of Art. 13 and 
therefore, cannot be challenged as infringing provisions of Part HI of the 
Constitution. ' 

The validity of the Constitution (24th Amendment) Act, 1971, has been 
upheld by the Supreme Court in the Fundamental Right's case.’ 

This question has finally been put at rest by the Constitution {42nd Amend- 
ment) Act, 1976 by inserting Cl. (4) in Art. 368 which provides that, “no 
amendment of this Constitution shall be called in question in any court except 
upon the ground th3t it has not been made in accordance with the procedure 
laid down by this Article.” 


1. Kessvinaod ». Stale of Kerala, AIR 1973 SC 1*61. 





RIGHT TO EQUALITY ■ 


69 


are immune from the jurisdiction of courts. Article 361 of the Indian Consti- 
tution affords an immunity to the President of India and the State Governors. 
Art. 361 provides that the President or the Governor of a State shall not be 
answerable to any Court for the exercise and performance of the powers and 
duties of his office or for any act done or purporting to be done by him in the 
exercise and performance of those powers and duties. 

No criminal proceeding shall be instituted or continued against the 
President or the Governor of a State in any Court during his term of office. 

No process for the arrest or imprisonment of the President or the Gover- 
nor of a State shall be issued from any Court during his term of office. 

Article 14 permits classification but prohibits class legislation. — The equal 
protection of laws guaranteed By Art. 14 docs not mean that all laws must 
be general in character. It docs not mean that the same laws should apply to 
all persons. It does not mean that every law must have universal application 
for, all persons are not, by nature, attainment or circumstances in the same 
position. The varying needs of different classes of persons often require 
separate treatment. 1 From the very nature of society there should be different 
laws in different places and the Legislature controls the policy and enacts 
laws in the best interest of the safety and security of the State. In fact, iden- 
tical treatment in unequal circumstances would amount to inequality. 3 So a 
reasonable classification is not only permitted but is necessary if society is to 
progress. 8 

The varying needs of different classes or sections of people requite 
differential and separate treatment. A Legislature which has to deal with 
diverse problems arising out of an indefinite variety of human relations must, 
of necessity, have the power of making special laws to attain particular objects, 
and for that purpose it must have large powers of election or classification of 
persons and things upon which such laws are to operate. 4 Thus what Art. 14 
forbids is class ■ legislation but it does Dot forbid reasonable classification, 8 
for legislative purposes. The classification, however, must not be arbitrary, it 
must rest upon reasonable grounds of discrimination. 8 

Class legislation is that which makes an improper discrimination by 
conferring particular privileges upon a class of persons arbitrarily selected 
from a large number of persons, all of whom stand in the same relation to 
the privilege granted and between whom and the persons not so favoured no 
reasonable distinction or substantial difference can be found justifying the 
inclusion of one and the exclusion of the one from such privilege. 7 

Test of Reasonable Classification.— While Art. 14 forbids class legislation. 


Cbiraajit Lai v. Uaioaot iadU. AIR I9il SC 4t, per Das, i. ; State of Bombay v. 
F. N. Balsara, AIR 1931 SC 318, per Fazal All, J. ; Kedar Nath v. Stale of West 
Bengal, AIR 1953 SC 404. 

Abdul Rahman v. Pinto, AIR 1951 11yd. II. 

Jagjit Singh v. State, AIR 1954 Hyd. 28. 

Ameeroonisa v. Mihboob, AIR 195J SC 91 ; 1953 SCR 404- It is said that the entire 
problem under the equal protection clause U one of classification or of drawing line*. 
Sec also Anwar Ali's case, AIR 1952 SC75. 

Lachman Das v. State of Bombay. AIR 1952 SC 235 ; Kamethwar Singh v. State, 
AIR 1951 Pat. 91 ; Loknath Mura v. Sute. AIR 1952 Orissa 42. 

R. C. Cooper v. Union of India. AIR 1970 SC 564. 

Monoponier Co. v. Ct'y of Lot Angeles, 33 Cal. App. 675. 



CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INOIA 


[Chap. 


Equality before Law.— The concept of equality does not mean absolute 
equality among human beings which is physically not possible to achieve. It 
is a coneept implying absence of any special privilege by reason of birth, creed 
or the like in favour of any individual, and also the equal subjection oj all 
individuals and classes to the ordinary law of the land. As Dr. Jennings 
puts it : 


“Equality before the law means that among equals the law should be 
equal and should be equally administered, that like should be treated alike. 
The right to sue and he sued, to prosecute and be prosecuted for the same 
kind of action should be same for all citizens of full age and understanding 
without distinctions, of race, religion, wealth, social status, or political 


influence." 1 


The guarantee of equality before the law is an aspect of what Dicey calls 
the Rule of Law in England.® It means that no man is above the law and 
that every person, whatever be his rank or conditions, is subject to the jurisdic- 
tion of ordinary courts. “With us”. Dicey wrote “every official from ‘ the 
Prime Minister down to a constable or a Collector of taxes is under the same 
responsibility for every act done without legal justification as any other 
citizen.” 


The rule of law embodied in Art. 14 is the “basic feature” of the Indian 
Constitution and hence it can not be destroyed even by an amendment of the 
Constitution under Art. 368 of the Constitution. 

Equal protection of the Laws.— The guarantee of equal protection of laws 
is similar to one embodied in the 14th Amendment to the American Consti- 
tution * This has been interpreted to mean subjection to equal law, applying 
to all in the same circumstances. 4 It only means that all persons have right 
to equal treatment in similar circumstances, both in the privileges conferred 
and in liabilities imposed by the laws. Equal laws should be applied to all in 
the same situation, and there should be no discrimination between one person 
and another. As regards the subject-matter of the legislation their position is 
the same.® Thus, the rule is that the like should be treated alike and not that 
unlike should be treated alike.® 


The word "any person” in Art. 14 of the Constitution denotes that the 
guarantee of the equal protection of laws is available to any person which 
includes any company or association or body of individuals. A person mav be 
a citizen or an alien. The equality before the law is guaranteed to all without 
regard to race, colour or nationality. Corporations ’ being juristic persons are 
also entitled to the benefit of Article 14. T 

Exceptions.— The above rule of equality is, however, not an absolute rule 
and there are a number of exceptions to it. For instance, foreign Diplomats 


’ p ' 49 ‘ See also Ram Prasad v. State of 
Punjab, AIR 1953 SC 215 , Lachman Das v. State of Bombay, AIR 1952 SC 235. 
Dicey : Law of Constitution, Iflth Ed., pp 202-3. 

“> “™ «»*' prow. 

Lindsley v. Natural Carbonic Gas Co., (1910) 220 US 61. 

^''^SCR^WnSanfwiUs Coastitu?io«l Uw, 


Dr. V. N. Shukla : Constitution of India, 5th Edn , p. 27. 
Chiranjit Lai v. Union of India, AIR |95| SC4|, 



RIGHT IO EQUAL! rY ; 


71 


« 1 . 


! _ (1) A. law may be constitutional even •’ though it relates to a single 
individual if, on account of some special circumstances or reasons applicable to 
him and not applicable to others, that single individual may be treated as a 
class by itself. - - 

(2) The presumption is always in favour of the constitutionality of an 
enactment and the burden ' is upon him who attacks it to show that there has 
been a clear transgression of constitutional principles. 

, (3) The presumption may be rebutted in certain cases by showing that 
on the face of the statute, there is no classification at all and no difference 
peculiar to any individual or class and not applicable to any other individual 
or class, and yet the law hits only a particular individual or class. 

(4) It must be presumed that the Legislature understands and correctly 
appreciates the need of its own people, that its laws arc directed to problems 
made manifest by experience and that its discriminations are based on 
adequate grounds, 

(3) In order to sustain tbe presumption of constitutionality the court 
may take into consideration matters of common knowledge, matters of report, 
the history of the limes and may assume every state of facts which can be 
conceived existing at the time of the legislation. 

(6) The Legislature is free to recognise degrees of harm and may confine 
its restrictions to those cases where the need is deemed to be the clearest. 

(7) While good faith and knowledge of the existing conditions on the 
part of a Legislature are to be presumed, if there is nothing on the face of the 
law or the surrounding circumstances brought to the notice of the court on 
which the classification may reasonably be regarded as based, the presumption 
of constitutionality cannot be carried to the extent of always holding that there 
must be some undisclosed and unknown reasons for subjecting certain indivi- 
duals or corporations to hostile or discriminating legislation. 

(8) The classification may be made on different basis, e. g, geographical 
or according to objects or occupations or the like. 

(9) The classification made by the Legislature need not be scientifically, 
perfect or logically complete.* Mathematical nicety and perfect equality are 
not required.* Equality before the law does not require mathematical equably 
of all persons id ail circumstances. Equal treatment does not mean identical 
treatment. Similarity, not identity of treatment is enough.® 

(10) Tbeie can be discrimination both in the substantive as well as the 
procedural law. Article 14 applies to both. 1 2 3 4 5 

If tbe classification satisfies tbe test laid dews in the shove propositions, 
the law will be declared constitutional. The question whether a classification 
is reasonable, and proper or not, must, however, be judged more on common 
sense than on legal subtletees. 4 


1. Kedar Nath v. Slate of West Bengal. AIR 1953 SC <04 : 1954 SCR 30 

2. Kameshwar Singh v. State of Bihar, AIR 1931 Pat 91. 

3. Per Faial Ali, J., io Balsara’s case. AIR 1951 SC 318 : (1951) SCR 682 (709, 710) and 
Chandra Shekhar Aijar, 3. in Anwar AH Sarkar's case, (1952) SCR 284 (349-30). 

4. State of West Bengal v. An war At i. A IR 1952 SC 75. 

5. Saghir Ahmad v. State, AIR 1934 All 257. 



70 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


it does not forbid reasonable classification for the purpose of legislation. The 
classification, however, should not be arbitrary. It must always rest upon 
some real and substantial distinction bearing reasonable and just relation to 
the things in respect to which the classification is made. Thus the only limita- 
tion otl the power of the State is that the classification should not be unreason- 
able and arbitrary. Classification to be reasonable must fulfil the following 
two conditions — 

(1) the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which 
distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out 
of the group ; and 

(2) tbe differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to 

be achieved by tbe Act.' # 

The differentia which is the basis of the classification and the object of 
the Act are two distinct things. What is necessary is that there must be a 
nexus between the basis of classification and the object of the Act which makes 
the classification. 11 

In Chiranjit Lai v. Union of India, 9 Mukherjea, J., observed that ‘Legis- 
lature undoubtedly has a wide field of choice in determining and classifying 
the subject of its laws, and if the law deals alike with all of a certain class, 
it is normally not obnoxious to the carge of equal protection, but the classi- 
ficatian should never be arbitrary. It must always rest upon some real and 
substantial distinction bearing a reasonable and just relation to the things in 
respect to which the classification is made ; and classification made without 
any substantial basis should be regarded as invalid. 

It is only when there is no reasonable basis for a classification that legis- 
lation making such classification may be declared discriminatory. Thus, tbe 
Legislature may fix the age at which persons shall be deemed competent to 
contract between themselves but no one will claim that competency to con- 
tract can be made to depend upon the stature or colour of the hair. Such a 
classification will be arbitrary. 4 

The true meaning and scope of Art. 14 have been explained in a number 
of cases® by the Supreme Court. In tbe leading case of Ramkrishna Dalmia v. 
Justice Tendolkarf Das, C. J., reviewed the whole case-law and summarised 
the important principles established in those cases for permissible classification. 
The learned Chief Justice has laid down the following propositions in DaUnia's 
case ; 


J. Kathi Ranning v. State of Saurashtra. AIR 1952 SC 12J. See also Ram Krishna 
YwOSC JM**"* A ' R 1958 sc 558 ‘•' nie Bank Nationalisation cage, AIR 


3. AIR 1951 SC 4l ; 1950 SCR 869 ; Southern Railway Co. v. Greene, 216 US 400, 

4. Anwar Ali's case, AIR 1952 SC 75. 

5. Chiranjit Lai v. Union of India, AIR 19JI SC 41 ; State of Bombay v. F. N. Balsara, 
c.l. SC , 318 ! Anwar Ali Sarkar’s case, AIR 1952 SC 75 ; Kathi Ranning v. 

Saurashtra, AIR 1952 SC 123 ; Lachmandas v. State of Bombay. AIR 1952 
aurJSjqasimRirvt’scase. MR 1953 SC 156 ; Habteb Mohammad v. State of 
Hyderabad. AIR 1953 SC 287 ; Bud ban Chowdbury v. State of Bihar, AIR 1955 

6. AIR 1958 SC 538. 



8] 


- RIGHT 1 0 EQUALITY 


LSW*2?2£ trsfflsr sx r 

which exempted the factories run hy the Goy-rnmtnSm^^ 3 3W 
to upplicd othrr factories or local authority wi h™Id ”1 °P™«>n but 

- Thus the Government ns a banker can beSve” n«M f “ n,fc 
Of its dues which may not be available to other bankers 3 /£?.£,- reaI, . satl0a 
penod of limitation may be allowed to Government for enlhinf “?* ? - 0aser 
compared to private persons in respect of £fi£S££? S '* da,mS 35 

(c) Article 14 and Taxation Laws.— The State has wide power in 
persons or objects tt will tax and a statote is not open to attack on Ik- ^ f 
that it taxes some persons and objects Rod not^otlen fi ^it doS°n^ 
mean that a Taxation law can claim immunity from the Mn ,i:!i “P 1 
Article 14 of the Constitution. It has to pass like anv other^H® dau5 '. m 
.eet bid down in Ark 14. Bn. ir must bSSbeSf That 'a,!eTiS 
view of the intrinsic complexity of fiscal adjustments of diverse efcmisS J 
considerable wide discretion m the matter of classification fnr\,Tin- ' 
The legislature baa ample freedom to JU “d dSfr' pSZ% P d “S 
okjf«s which it would taa/aSdShS, it “uSd 
not tax. So long as the classificauon made within this wide and flexibl* mni~ 
by a taarug statute doe, ooi transgress the fundamental orbSweanSteriHE 
the doctrine oferiual.ty, it is net objectionable on the ground of dterimb.? 

non merely because tt laves or eaempts from laa tome ihcomts or obSTf.a 
not others. Nor the mere fact that am fall, more hcjSjonsomfTnIEe 
same category, n by itself a ground to render the law invalid. It ““Jv 
snthm the ranee of its selection the law operates unequal y and 
'““r; ; to , s “ of ovditJ lelassifieation that thenT'wouid teyi“aS Sr 
Art. 14. 5 Where tax is imposed only on the sale of hides and *kin» ° °: 

wt C t«!dT d ° n,hC£rOUDd thC purchasCT of other commodities ^ 


,, /H icre ** 3 range of selection and freedom in appraisal not onlv in 
Hjf ° b ro, tS taxat,on Rod the manner of taxation but also in the determina- 
tion of the rate or rates applicable. u.rmioa- 

In £. I. Tobacco Co. v. State of A. P a sales tax on Virginia tobacco but 
not on country tobacco has been held to be valid. In Western India Theatre v 
Cantonment Board, 9 a higher tax on cinema-honses containing large seat in? 
accommodation and situated in fashionable or bnsy localities where the numbe? 
or visitors is more numerous, than the tax imposed on smaller cinema-houses 
containing less accommodation and situated in a locality where visitors are 
poor Md less nnmerons, was held not to violate the cquat protection clause of 


In Ttrjford Tea Co. v. Kerala State,* under the Kerala Plantation (Addi- 

1. AIR 1933 SC 72*. 

2. AIR 1954 SC 153. 

1 4 ttSS,JS£-,hric°L[ mhh - A,R m! “ ’• c.lteruwor 

4. Nav Ratan Ut v. State of Rajasthan. AIR 196 J SC 1704. 

3. ! T Officer SSuIIon* r N. T. R. Rrmhai. AIR 1976 SC 670 ; Jaipur Hosiery Mills*. 
Slate of Rijasthin, AIR 1971 SC 1330. 

6. V. M. SyeJ v. Stale of Ant&ra. AIR 1954 SC 314. 

7. AIR I *62 SC 17 J3. 

*. AIR HS9 SC 542. 

9. AIR 1 970 SC tll3. 

Const. 10 



Tl CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA (Chap 

Basis of Classification.— The constitutionality of every statute depends 
on whether there is a basis for the classification made in the statute. The basis 
of classification may be different ; e. g; geographical, vocational, difference in 
time, difference in nature of persons, trade and callings or occupation, 'etc. 
It is proposed to refer to certain broad classifications here : 

(a) Geographical basis.— The words ‘fwithin the territory of India” used 
in Art. 14 do not mean that there must be a uniform law throughout the 
country. A law may be applicable to one State and not to another. A State 
may be divided into several geographical regions and a law may be applicable 
to one and not to others depending on particular circumstances. Thus in 
Krishna Singh v. State of Rajasthan ,* the validity of Marwar Land Revenue 
Act, 1949, was challenged on the ground that it applied only to Marwar por- 
tion of the State of Rajasthan and not to the whole of the State. The Supreme 
Court held the law not to be violative of Art. 14. It said that the particular 
conditions of Marwar portion of the State required a special law to be applied 
there. Similarly, fixation of different dates for holding elections in different 
constituencies according to the various exigencies prevailing in the locality in 
which the constituency was situated was held not to violate Article 14. 

In Ram Chandra v. State of Orissa a two Acts were passed to nationalize 
road transport. One Act applied to one part of the State and the other to 
the other part of the State because the conditions differed materially in the two 
parts. The Acts were upheld by the Supreme Court. - 

Where classification of territory was made into dangerously disturbed 
areas under the East Punjab Public Safety Act of 1949 and providing for a 
simpler, shorter and speedier trial of offences committed in disturbed areas, it 
was held valid as the basis of classification was rational aDd based on intelli- 
gible differentia.* 

In State of Kerala v. T. P. Roshana* the Supreme Court has held that the 
linkage or distribution of seats on the basis of University-wise student strength 
for admission of students to medical colleges is violative of Art. 14 of the 
Constitution. There are two Universities in the State of Kerala— the Kerala and 
the Calicut Universities— to which the four medical colleges arc affiliated, there 
under the jurisdiction of Kerala University and one to the Calicut University. 
Calicut University cater to the academic requriementof the Malabar area which 
is regarded as notoriously backward from the point of view of college educa- 
tion. The number of colleges which provide pre-degree courses necessary by 
way of qualification for entrance into medical colleges in Malabar area are 
relatively fewer than in the remaining part of the State' where there are 
numerous colleges and pre-degree students. Following the Chanchalas case 
Krishna Iyer, J. held that the scheme violated Art. 14 because there was no 
nexus between the registered student strength and the seats to be allotted. ‘ 
The fewer the colleges the fewer the pre-degree and degree students. And so, 
the linkage of the division of seats with the registered student strength would 
make au irrational inroad into the University-wise allocation. Such a formula 
would be punishment for backwardness, not a promotion ofthier advancement. 

(b) Discrimination by the State in its own favour. — The State as a person 
constitutes a different class as compared with private citizens. In Saghir Ahmad 

1. AIR 1955 SC 7*J5. See also D. P Joshi v. Slate of M. B., AIR 1955 SC 334. 

2. AIR 1956 SC 298. 

3. Gopichand v. Delhi Administration. AIR 1959 SC 609. 

4. AIR 1979 SC 765. 



74 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


tiooal Tax) Act, 1960, at amended by Kerala Plantation (Additional Tax) Act, 
1967, the Kerala Government imposed a uniform tax on all the plantations at 
the rate of Rs. 50 per hectare. ‘Plantations’ means land used for growing 
seven kinds of crops— (1) Cocoanut, (2) Arecanut, (3) Rubber. (4) Coffee, (5) 
Tea, (6) Cardamom and (7) Pepper. The petitioners challenged the validity 
of the Act on the ground that it makes unreasonable classification (of planta- 
tion) : that unequals have been treated as equals and that a fiat rate tax imposed 
on all plantations irrespective of their yield is arbitrary. The Supreme Court 
held that the Act does not contravene Art. 14. The Act, no doubt, deals with 
seven different kinds of plantations and imposes a uniform rate of Rs. 50 per 
hectare but it lays down principle on which equal treatment is ensured. In 
the case of cocoanut, arecanut, rubber, coffee and pepper plantations, plants 
capable of yielding produce are to be counted and then the hectares are deter- 
mined by dividing the total number of plants by a certain figure. This is 
intended to equalise different plantations for purpose of taxability. In the 
remaining two cases the extent of land .yielding the crops is itself taken as the 
measure for the tax because it is considered fair and just to treat one actual 
hectare of crop yielding plantation as equal to other areas converted into 
hectares on the basis of the number of plants or trees. Differences in yield 
between one plantation and another haviDg the same crop, no doubt, arise 
from situation, attitude and rainfall but they are not the only factois. The 
law docs not single out any particular plantation for hostile or unequal treat- 
ment. There is no discrimination, notwithstanding the uniform rate for each 
plantation based on the actual crop-yielding area and the Act therefore is 
valid. 


In Jaipur Hosiery Mills v. Store of Rajasthan, 1 2 a Notification was issued 
by tbe State Government under the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act exempting from 
sales tax any garment whether prepared within or imported from outside 
Rajasthan, tbe value of which did not exceed Rs. 4 in single piece but this 
exemption was not given to "hosiery" porducts. The appellant challenged the 
validity of the Act on the ground that there was no basis of classification bet- 
ween garments as such and knitted garments. The Supreme Court, held that 
tbe classification between garments in general the value of which does not 
exceed Rs, 4 in a single piece and ‘hosiery products’ including hosiery garments 
is valid. Hosiery products are generally knitted articles and are thus different 
from woven articles. It is not for the court to decide whether the hosiery 
articles should have been given the exemption iu Ihc same way as other 
garments. 


In V. J. Ferreira v. Bombay Municipality * the validity of section 27 of tbe 
Bombay Building Repairs and Reconstruction Board Act, under which a tax 
was imposed on residential buildings, though they were in sound and eood 
condition and would not require structural repairs, was challenged as violar.w 
of Article 14 of the Constitution. Tbe Act has classified the building 
into three categories: (1) residential tenanted buildings, from th# ,»!? 
<?3, existing hnildiru^L, K. a.. »hmr- hnilr. after, ‘hr; intre on wtiirh 
!“* brought into force. end (3) by dmdrag those which are 
into three categories actandrog to the three periods in which theism, con 


The Court held that the classification 
test and those exising at the time when the 


of residential buildings from the 
Act was brought into force from 


1. AIR 197 

2. AIR ty \ 



RIGHT TO EQUALITY 


75 


$] 


the new ones which might be built thereafter can be regarded as based on in- 
telligible differentia and related to the objective which the legislature had 
sought to achieve. The primary object of the Act is not to repair all build- 
ings subject to tax but to prevent the annually recurrent mishief of house 
collapse and the human tragedy and deprivations they cause. Thus the tax is 
being levied to prevent such disasters. There is no question of unequal treat- 
ment between one class of owners and another. The classification of buildings 
into three categories is based on their age and construction current during the 
periods of their erection. It is, therefore, based on intelligible differentia 
and closely related to the objects of the legislature. 

In G. K. Krishnan v. State of Tamil Nadu} the Government by a Noti- 
fication, under the Madras Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1931, enhanched the 
tax on omnibuses from Rs. 30 per seat per quarter to Rs. 100 per seat per 
quarter. The petitioner, who was the owner of an omnibus, challenged the 
validity of this Notification on the ground that ihe distinction between contract 
carriages and stage carriages in the matter of levy of vehicle tax is discrimina- 
tory and therefore hits Article 14 of the Constitution. It was contended that 
there was no reason for imposing vehicle tax at a higher rate on contract 
carriages than on stage carriages because both are similarly situated with 
respect to the purpose of vehicle taxation, namely, the use of the road and, 
therefore, a higher vehicle tax on contract carriages is manifestly discrimina- 
tory. In short, the argument was that the classifications of Ihe vehicles as 
stage carriages and contract carriages for the purpose of a higher levy of 
vehicle tax on contract carriages has no reasonable relation to the purpose of 
the Act. 

The Court, however, held that the lev^ of enhanced tax on contract 
carriages was valid and does not offend Article 14. In the absence of any 
material placed before the Court, the classification between stage carriages and 
contract carriages for the purpose of imposing higher tax on the latter is 
presumed to be reasonable. The classification was based oo ‘local conditions’ 
of which the Government was fully cognizant. The classification is made 
on the basis of the capacity of the contract carriages which are running 
more miles and therefore using the road more than the stage carriages 
which have got a time schedule, specified routes and minimum and maximum 
number of trips. The differentiation thus made had a resonable relation 
to the object of the Act which was to avoid unhealthy competition between 
omnibuses and regular stage carriage buses and to put down the misuse of 
omnibuses. 

In Income Tax Officer , Shillong v. N. T. R. Rymbal • the respondent 
challenged the constitutional validity of section 10 of Ihe Income-tax Act, 1961, 
on the ground that it is violative of Art. 14 of the Constitution and invalid. 
The respondent belongs to Jaintia Scheduled Tribe and is a permanent resident 
of United Khasi-Jaintia Hills Autonomous district under the Sixth Schedule 
of the Constitution (one of the tribal areas) within the State of Meghalaya. 
He joined service under the Government of Assam in 1941. In the assess- 
ment year 1970-71 he was posted at Shillong as Secretary to Ihe Government 
of Assam. The Assam Secretariat building which was the place of hu work, 
was in that part of the town which is not included in Shillong Municipality and 
therefore is not a part of the tribal area as described in part 20 of the Sixth 

I AtR 1975 SC 58J. See alio Stale of KarrutiLa ». D. Shirma, AIR 1975 SC 
594. 

2. AIR 1976 SC 670. 



74 


COSITITVVVHU. law or INDIA 


(Chap. 


tiooal Tax) Act, I960, a* amended by Kerala Plantation (Additional Tax) Act, 
1967, the Kerala Government imposed a uniform tax on all the plantations at 
the rate of Rs. 50 per hectare. ‘Plantations' means land used for growing 
seven kmdjofaops—(l)Coco3cut, (2) Arecanut, (3) Rubber, (4) Coffee, (5) 
Tea, (6) Cardamom and (7) Pepper. The petitioners challenged the validity 
of the Act on the ground that it makes unreasonable classification (of planta- 
tion) : that unequals have been treated as equals and that a flat rate tax imposed 
on all plantations irrespective of tbeir yield is arbitrary. The Supreme Court 
held that the Act does not contravene Art. 14. The Act, no doubt, deals with 
seven different kinds of plantations and imposes a uniform rate of Rs. 50 per 
hectare but it Jays down principle on which equal treatment is ensured. In 
the case of cocoa nut. arecanut, rubber, coffee and pepper plantations, plants 
capable of yielding produce ere to be counted and then the hectares are deter- 
mined by dividing the total number of plants by a certain figure. This is 
intended to equalise different plantations for purpose of taxability. In the 
remaining two cases the extent of land yielding the crops is itself taken as the 
measure for the tax because ll is considered fair and just to treat one actual 
hectare or crop yielding plantation as equal to other areas converted into 
hectares on the basis of the number of plants or trees. Differences in yield 
between one plantation and another having the same crop, no doubt, arise 
from situation, altitude and rainfall but they are not the only faciois. The 
law docs not single out any particular plantation for hostile or unequal treat- 
ment . There is no discrimination, notwithstanding the uniform rate for each 
plantation based on the actual crop-yielding area and the Act therefore is 
valid. 

In Jaipur Hosiery Mills v. State of Rajasthan, 1 a Notification was issued 
by the State Government under the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act exempting from 
sales tax any garment whether prepared within or imported from outside 
Rajasthan, the value of which did not exceed Rs. 4 in single piece but this 
exemption was not given to “hosiery" porducts. The appellant challenged the 
validity of the Act on the ground that there was no basis of clasiification bet- 
ween garments as such and knitted garments. The Supreme Court, held that 
the classification between garments in general the value of which does not 
exceed Rs. 4 in a single piece and ‘hosiery products’ including hosiery garments 
is valid. Hosiery products are generally knitted articles and are thus different 
from woven articles. It is not for the court to decide whether the hosiery 
articles should have been given the exemption in the same way as other 
garments. 


In V. J. Ferreira v. Bombay Municipality* the validity of section 27 of the 
Bombay Building Repairs and Reconstruction Board Act, under which a tax 
was imposed on residential buildings, though they were in sound and good 
condition and would not require structural repairs, was challenged as violative 
of Article 14 of the Constitution. The Act has classified (he buif dines 
into three categories : (1) residential tenanted buildings, from the rest 
(2) existing buildings. /. e. those built alter the date on which (hr am 
was brought into force, and (3) by dividing those which are liable to tax 
sfructed C cate&OTKS accor<3, °^ to ,hf « Periods j„ which they were con- 

The Court held that the classification of residential . * 

rest and those cxising at the time when the Act was brought lill foree'from 



8] 


RIGHT TO EQUALITY 


77 


betaken under section 33(6). The 'reason is that tax evasion by, the un- 
registered dealer is more difficult to detect than tax ‘evasion by a registered 
dealer. In case of a registered dealer the Sales Tax Authorities have basic 
information! in pursuance of which they can exercise due vigilance, 
check and detect any tax evasion by him within a reasonable time fixed in 
section 35: ’ • , 

, (d) Special Courts and Special Procedure.— Under Art. 246 (2) Parliament, 
by law, is empowered to set up Special Courts and to provide special proce- 
dure for the trial of certain ‘offences’ or 'classes of offences*. Such a Jaw will 
not be violative of Art. 14 if it lays down proper guidelines for classifying 
‘offences’, ‘classes of offences’ or ‘classes’ of cases to be tried by Special Courts. 1 2 3 
Likewise, the special procedure prescribed by such a law should also not be 
substantially different from the ordinary procedure prescribed by ordinary 
Law. The first leading case on this topic is Slate of West Bengal v. Anwar All .* 
In this case the validity of the trial of the respondent, Anwar Ali and 49 
others, by the Special Courts established under section 5 (1) of the West Bengal 
Special Courts Act, 1950, was at issue.. The Act was passed "to provide for the 
speidler trial of eertalt offences" as stated in the Preamble. Sections 6 to 15 
prescribed the special procedure • which courts had to follow in the trial of 
the cases referred to. -The Supreme Court held that section 5 (l)of the Act 
contravened Art.- 14 and was void since it conferred arbitrary powers on 
the Government to classify offences or cases at its pleasure and the Act did not 
lay down any policy or guidelines for the exercise of discretion to classify cases 
or offences. The majority held that the procedure laid down by the Act for 
the trial by the Special Courts varied substantially from the procedure laid 
down for the trial of offences generally by the Criminal Procedure Code. The 
Court said that the Act did not classify or lay down any basis for classification 
nor did it mention clearly what kinds of cases were to be directed for trial 
by the Special Courts. It thus left it to the uncontrolled discretion of the 
State Government to direct any type of cases which it liked to be tried by 
the Special Court. The object as stated in the Preamble of the Act "speedier 
trial of certain offences" was n very vague and uncertain principle to consti- 
tute n reasonable basis for rational classification. Further, the Court held that 
a rule or procedure laid down by law comes as much within the purview of 
Art., 14 as any rule of substantive law, and it is necessary that all litigants 
who' are similarly situated are entitled to the same procedural rights with like 
protection without discrimination. 

In Kathi Harming v. State of Saurashira ,» the validity of Section II of the 
Saurashtra State Public Safety (Third Amendment) Ordinance, 1949, which 
provided for establishment of Special Courts of criminal jurisdiction for 
certain special areas to tty certain ‘classes of offences* in accordance with a 
simplified and shortened procedure was involved. The object as mentioned 
in the Ordinance was to provide for *' public safety, public order and prestnatbn 
of peace end tranquillity” in the Slate of Saurashtra. It thus referred 
to four distinct categories of ‘offences’ or ‘cases’ which could be directed 
by the Government to be tried by the Special Court established under the 
Ordinance. 


1. Inre-Spedi1CoufttR.il 1978. AIR \m SC 478 ; Mioa I L*t 1 OAlBM 
Lid- v. Municipal Corporation of G idler Bombay, AIR 19/4 5. C. 

2. AIR 1957 S.C7J. 

3. AIR |*»J2 S.C. 113- See a ho K. KiUirr. Sate of Wot BcnpL A JR I9fi JSC. 



76 


CONSTITUTION I L LAW OP INDIA 


(Chap. 


Schedule. The Income-tax Authorities sought to tax respondent s jncome from 
salary derived from the non-scheduled area. They contended that such income 
is not covered by the exemption provided under section 10 (26) (a) of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961. . According to section 10 (26) (a) of the Act, a person 
is entitled to the exemption only if three conditions are fulfilled:— (1) He 
should be a member of Scheduled Tribe. (2) He should be residing in the 
tribal areas. (3) The income in - respect of which the exemption Is claimed, 
must be an income which accrues or arises to him from any source in 
that area. 

The asstssee filed a petition under Article 226 challenging the assessment 
order and demand for the tax on the ground that it is violative of Art. 14 of the 
Constitution. The High Court struck down sub-clause (9) of the Act and held 
that this exemption has been enacted for the benefit of the Scheduled Tribes 
residing in specified areas. , The object or the exemption clause will be frus- 
trated and made nugatory if the income of a member of the Scheduled Tribe 
is made subject to tax merely because the source of such an income is outside 
that area. In the opinion of the High Court the classification bctwxn mem- 
bers of the Scheduled Tribes whose income accrues or arises from any source 
from tribal 8teas and members of the Scheduled Tribe whose income accrues or 
arises from any source outside the tribal area was not based on any intelligible 
differentia and therefore unconstitutional. _ ' 

On appeal, the Supreme Court reversed the judgment of the High Court 
and held that the classification made under the aforesaid sub-Clause (a) is bas- 
ed on intelligible differentia and is constitutionally valid. The court rejected 
the argument of the respondent that making of the exemptions conditional 
upon the classifications provided by in sub-clause (a) of the Act would deter the 
members of Scheduled Tribes from joining the main stream of national life, or 
would be inconsistent with the directive principles embodied in Article 46. 
This Arlitle contains the directive principles for the prmolion af educational 
and economic interest of the weaker sections of the people particularly the Sche- 
duled Castes aud Scheduled Tribes. Its primary objective is to provide 
protection to the weaker sections of society. Members of (be Scheduled Tribes 
who are enterprising and resourceful enough to move out of the seclusion 
of the tribal areas and successfully compete with their Indian brethren out- 
side those areas and rise to remunerative positions in service or business, 
cease to be "weaker section”. 


State of Gujarat v. RamjHhal 1 (1979) the appellant, who were unregistered 
dealer, challenged the validity of Sec. 336 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act 1959 

(corresponding to Sec. 14 (6) of the 1953 Act) on the ground that it makes un- 
reasonable classification between registered dealers and unregistered dealers 
and therefore violates Art. 14 of the Constitution. Under section 33 (6) no 
limitation is prescribed for taking action while section ?5 prescribes a limi- 
talion within which action can betaken by Sales Tan Amhorilies against 
dealers who evade tax. The Coast held the classUcatino salM fcma* fSttar 
the unregistered dealer who fads togel himself registered and does M ray 
any tag is a separate eta tinder section 33 (6) diffe, colly from the dealers 
falling under .sec ton 35 rests on intelligible differentia having a rational 
nexus with the object of preventing tax-evasion. Section. 33 (6) is consSd Ma 
particular clast of tax evaders, namely unregistered dealers, while seS 35 I, 
general provision dealing with escaped assessment. There is rational has , 
for not. putting any restriction as to the length of time within which action can 

I. AIR 1979 S. C. 1099, 



8j’ )[ 


RIGHT TO EQUALITY 


79 


tution and organisation, that is to say, the creation and setting up of Special 
Courts. Clause (2) of the Bill is therefore within the competence of the Parlia- 
ment. The Court rejected the argument regarding the exhaustiveness of the 
provisions of Chapter IV of Part V and held that the Parliament is competent 
to pass laws in respect of matters enumerated in Lists I and 111 notwithstanding 
the fact that by such laws, the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is enlarged in 
a manner not contemplated by or beyond what is contemplated by various 
Articles in Chapter IV of Part V. The Constitution does not provide that not- 
withstanding anything contained in Art. 246 (1) and (2) the Parliament shall 
have no power or competence to enlarge the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, 
quantitatively or qualitatively, except in accordance with and to the extent to 
which it is permissible to it to do so under any of the provisions of Chapter IV 
Part V. The provisions of Chapter IV, Part V must therefore be read' 
in harmony and conjunction with the other provisions of the Constitution 
and not in derogation thereof. Parliament is competent to provide by Cl. 
10 (1) of the Bill that an appeal shall lie as of right from any judgment or 
order of a Special Court to the Supreme Court both on fact and on law. 
A law which confers additional powers on the Supreme Court by anlarging 
its jurisdiction is evidently a law with respect to the jurisdiction and powers 
of that Court within the meaning of Entry 77 of List I. The language of 
Entry 77 of List I is very wide and unqualified. It is not circumscribed by the 
qualification, with respect to any of the matters in this List, that is. List 1. 
Thus power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter contained in 
Entry 77, which is ‘jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court' can be 
exercised without reference to any of the matters contained in List 1 or in any 
other List. There can be no justification for curtailing the amplitude of the 
Parliament’s power in relation to the subject-matter of Entry 77 by reason of 
anything contained in Chapter IV, Part V. Parliament also ^possesses 
the legislative competence to provide by Clause 6 of the Bill for the transfer of 
pending appeals and revisions in the courts to the Supreme Court. Clause 6 
falls squarely within the field of legislation contained in Entry 77 of List I. If 
there is power in the Parliament to establish a new court, it would certainly 
have power to provide for an appeal to the Supreme Court from the decision of 
that Court. 

The Court upheld the classification made by Sec. 4 (I) of the Bill as it 
classifies both 'offences’ and a class of offenders, the former in relation 
to the period in the Preamble, that is to say, from Feb. 27, 1975 to June 25, 
1975 during emergency and in relation to the objective mentioned In the 
Preamble that it is imperative for the functioning of Parliamentary democracy 
and the institutions created by or under the Constitution of India that the 
commission of such offences should be decided speedily : and the latter in rela- 
tion to their status, that is to say, in relation to the high public or political 
office held by them in India. It is only if both these conditions exist the 
prosecution can be instituted in the Special Courts. Offences alleged to have 
been committed during the period or emergency constitute a class by them- 
selves and so do the persons who are alleged to have utilised the high public or 
political office held by them as a cover or opportunity for the purpose of 
committing those offences. The cover of emergency provided a unique 
opportunity to the holders of such offices to subvert the rule of law and 
perpetrate political crimes on the society. Thus the persons who are singled 
out by the Bill for trial before special court possess common characteristics 
and those who fall outside that group do not possess them since they lacked 
the authority which co -nes from official position. The object of the Bill is to 
ensure a speedy trial of the offences and offenders who constitute a single 



78 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


The Supreme Court held that the Act was not violative of Art. 14 of the 
Constitution. The Court said the main distinction between the West Bengal 
case and the present Ordinance was that ' while in former there was no prin- 
ciple to be found to control the application of discriminatory provisions _ or 
to correlate these provisions to some reasonable, tangible and rational objec- 
tive ; the latter clearly laid down the guiding principle, that is, to provide 
for public safety, maintenance of public order and preservation of peace and 
tranquillity in the State. The mere mention of tbe speedier trial as the object 
in the West Bengal Act did not cure the defect, because the expression afford- 
ed no help in determining what cases required speedier trial. Thus -the 
main object to tbe West Bengal Act was that it permitted discrimination 
without reason or without any rational basis. 

In re Special Courts Bill, J978 1 the question referred to the Supreme Court 
for its advisory opinion was whether the Special Courts Bill, 19 18 or any of 
its provisions, if enacted, would be constitutional. The object of the Bill as 
stated in the preamble was to empower the Government to set up Special 
Courts for the trial of emergency offences committed by persons who have 
held high public or political offices in the country. It was stated therein 
that it was imperative for the functioning of parliamentary democracy and the 
institution created by or under the Constitution of India that the commission 
of offences referred to above should be judicially determined with the utmost 
despatch. Clause (2) or the Bill empowered the Central Government to 
create adequate number of courts to be called Special Courts. Clause 10(1) 
of the Bill provided that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 an appeal shall lie as a matter of right from 
any judgment or order of the Special Court to the Supreme Court both on 
fact and on law. Clause 6 provided that if at the date of declaration in 
respect of any offences an appeal or revision was pending in any court of 
appeal or revision, the same shall stand transferred for disposal to the Supreme 
Court. 

At the hearing stage of. the Presidential reference in the Supreme Court 
a number of objections were raised against the provisions of the Bill. It was 
contended, that Parliament has no legislative competence to set up Special 
Courts in view of the provisions in Chapter IV, Part V of the Constitution 
called ‘the Union Judiciary’ which are very exhaustive and therefore no more 
or no greater jurisdiction can be conferred on the, Supreme Court than the 
provisions of that Chapter authorise or warrant. ' Secondly, the provisions 
of the Bill are violative of Art. 14, and Art. 21 of the Constitution. It was 
contended that the Bill makes unreasonable classifications and there is no rela- 
tionship between the basis of the classification and the object of the Bill : 
The Bill furpishes no guidance for making the declaration under Section 4 
(1) for deciding who and for what reasons should be sent up for trial to the 
Special Courts and the guidelines prescribed by it are vague and indefinite. 
It was urged that the procedure prescribed by the Bill for trial before the Spe- 
cial Courts is violative of Art. 21 because it is unfair and unjust and 
hence unconstitutional. 

The seven-Member Bench of the Supreme Court unanimously held that 
Parliament has legislative competence to enact the Bill. Entry ll-A of the 
Concurrent list relates to Administration of Justice, onstitution and organisa- 
l ‘ on r,?“, C0 J? rt fr exce Pt the Supreme Court and the High Court. By virtue of 
Art. 246 (2) Parliament has the power to make laws with respect to the Consti- 


\. 


(. AIR 1979 S. C. 47g. 


RIGHT TO EQUALITI 


79 


*J- HI 


tution and organisation, that is to say, the creation and setting up of Special 
Courts. Clause (2) of the Dili is therefore within the competence of the Parlia- 
ment. The Court rejected the argument regarding the exhaustiveness of the 
provisions of Chapter IV of Part V and held that the Parliament is competent 
to pass laws in respect of matters enumerated in Lists I and III notwithstanding 
the fact that by such laws, the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is enlarged in 
a manner not contemplated by or beyond what is contemplated by various 
Articles in Chapter IV of Part V. The Constitution does not provide that not- 
withstanding anything contained in Art. 246 (1) and (2) the Parliament shall 
have no power or competence to enlarge the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, 
quantitatively or qualitatively, except in accordance with and to the extent to 
which it is permissible to it to do so under any of the provisions of Chapter IV, 
Part V. The provisions of Chapter IV, Part V must therefore be read 
in harmony and conjunction with the other provisions of the Constitution 
and not in derogation thereof. Parliament is competent to provide by Cl. 
10 (1) of the Bill that an appeal shall lie as of right from any judgment or 
order of a Special Court to the Supreme Court both on fact and on law. 
A law which confers additional powers on the Supreme Court by anlarging 
its jurisdiction is evidently a law with respect to the jurisdiction and powers 
of that Court within the meaning of Entry 77 of List I. The language of 
Entry 77 of List I is very wide and unqualified. It is not circumscribed by the 
qualification, with respect to any of the matters in this List, that is. List I. 
Thus power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter contained in 
Entry 77, which is 'jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court’ can be 
exercised without reference to any of the matters contained in List 1 or in any 
other List. There can be no justification for curtailing the amplitude of the 
Parliament’s power in relation to the subject-matter of Entry 77 by reason of 
anything contained in Chapter IV, Part V. Parliament also •possesses 
the legislative competence to provide by Clause 6 of the Bill for the transfer of 
pending appeals and revisions in tbe courts to the Supreme Court. Clause 6 
falls squarely within the field of legislation contained in Entry 77 of List I. If 
there is power in tbe Parliament to establish a new court, it would certainly 
have power to provide for an appeal to the Supreme Court from tbe decision of 
that Court. 

The Court upheld the clarification made by Sec. 4 (1) of the Bill as it 
classifies both 'offences’ and a class of offenders, the former in relation 
to the period in the Preamble, that is to say, from Feb. 27, 1975 to June 25, 
1975 during emergency and in relation to the objective mentioned in the 
Preamble that it is imperative for the functioning of Parliamentary democracy 
and the institutions created by or under the Constitution of India that the 
commission of such offences should be decided speedily ; and the latter in rela- 
tion to their status, that is to say, in relation to the high public or political 
office held by them in India. It is only if both these conditions exist the 
prosecution can be instituted in the Special Courts. Offences t Ueged to have 
been committed during the period of emergency constitute a class by them- 
selves and so do the persons who are alleged to have utilised the high public or 
political office held by them as a cover or opportunity for the purpose of 
committing those offences. The cover of emergency provided a unique 
opportunity to the holders or such offices to subvert the rule of law and 
perpetrate political crimes on the society. Thus the persons who are singled 
out by the BUI for trial before special court possess common characteristics 
and those who fall outside that group do not possess them since they lacked 
the authority which cones from official position. The object of the Bill is to 
ensure a speedy trial of the offences and offenders who constitute a single 



CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


and special class. Thus there is a close' relationship between the basis of 
classification under Cl. (4) (1) and the object of (speedier trial) of the Bill as 
stated in the 6th paragraph of the Preamble of the Bill. The Act lays down 
proper guidelines for the exercise of the discretion by the Executive. By clause 
5, only those offences can be tried by the Special Court in respect of which the 

Central Government has made a declaration under Cl. (4) (1) of the Bill that 
declaration can be made by the Central Government only if it is of the 
opinion that there is a prima facie evidence or the commission of an offence 
during the period mentioned in the preamble by a person who held a high 
public or political office in India. 

The Court held that the classification made by Cl. 4 (1) of the Bill is valid 
to the limited extent to which the Central Government is empowered to make 
the declaration in respect of offences alleged to have been committed during 
the period of emergency by persons holding high public or political offices. 
The classification is invalid in so far it covers offences committed by such 
persons between Feb. 27 and June 25, 1975. Thus, the Court unanimously 
rejected the provisions of the Bill “to ante-date the emergency” from June to 
Feb., 1975. The Bill sought to regard the “preparations” for emergency as 
starting from Feb. 1975, instead of from June 5, 1975 the date of the procla- 
mation of the emergency. By “artificially” seeking to extend the category of 
emergency offences to include acts prior to the declaration of the emergency, 
the Court held, the Bill destroyed the basis of a rational classification of 
emergency offences and hence, violative of right to equality under Art. 14. 

Once the classification is upheld the court held no grievance can be 
entertained under Att. 14 that the procedure prescribed by the Bill for the trial 
of offences is harsher or more disadvantageous as compared with the 
procedure for ordinary trials. 

However, the Bill has got to meet the challenge of other provisions of the 
Constitution also. The theory that articles conferring fundamental rights are 
mutually exclusive and that any particular article in Part 111 constitutes a 
self-contained code having been discarded, it becomes necessary to examine 
whether the procedure prescribed by the Bill is violative of any other provision 
of the Constitution. Article 21 provides that no person shall be deprived of 
his life or personal liberty except according to the procedure established by law. 
In Maneka Gandhi's case (A.I.R. 1978 S.C. 597) it had been held by the majori- 
ty that the procedure contemplated by Art. 21 must be right and just and fair 
and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive, otherwise, it would be no procedure 
at all. It is therefore imperative to examine whether the procedure prescribed 
in the Bill is just and fair or is in any ■ respect arbitrary or oppressive. The 
Court by majority held that the provisions of the Bill are unfair and unjust in 
three important respects, Firstly there is no provision in the Bill for the transfer 
of cases from one Special Court to another. The manner in which a judge con- 
ducts himself may dissolve a bias, in which case the interest of justice would 
require that the trial of case ought to be withdrawn from him. Secondly, clause 
7 of the Bill empowers the Government to appoint retired judges of the High 
Court to preside over a Special Court. While sitting judge enjoys, a security 
of tenure a retired judge will hold office as a judge of the Special Court during 
the pleasure of the Government. The pleasure doctrine is subversive of judicial 
independence. Clause 7 thus violates Art. 21 of the Constitution and is, 
therefore, void Thirdly, Cl. 7, empowers the Central Government to appoint 
judge of the special courts ‘in consultation’ with the Chief Justice of India. The 
process of ‘consultation* has its own limitations, and may not act as an effective 
check, on the Etecutive, There is no provision to obtain his ‘concurrence’. 



8 ] 


RIGHT TO EQUALITY 


81 


These arc the three procedures of infirmities from which the Bill suffers and 
which are violative of Art. 21, in the sense that they make the procedure pres- 
cribed by the Bill unjust and unfair to the accused. This Bill is valid in all 
other respects. 

If the above mentioned three procedural changes are made in the Bill it 
would be valid, firstly that only sitting and not retired High Court Judges would 
be appointed to the special courts, secondly, such appointments must be made 
with the“concurrence” and not simply “in consultation” with-the Chief Justice 
of India ; thirdly the accused must be given right to apply to the Supreme Court 
to get his case transferred from one Special Court to another Special Court. All 
these three amendments, the majority held ; would render the procedure pres- 
cribed in the Bill “fair and just” All three procedural amendments required 
by the court were acceptable to the Central Government. Since the Govern- 
ment bad accepted the court’s suggestion on all three points there was no 
question that the proposed measure would be unjust or arbitrary. Justice P. N. 
Singhal, wbo concurred with the majority view on most aspects, gave a 
dissenting judgment on the point of the status of the Special Courts to try 
emergency cases referred by the Government. He held that the two clause? of 
the Bill Cl— (5) and (7) arc unconstitutional because they enabled the Central 
Government to decide which of its nominated judges shall try which accused” 
and as such amounts to a “serious traosgression on the independence of the 
judiciary. He preferred the creation of additional courts of the same category 
as the "ordinary criminal courts” with necessary procedural changes to avoid 
delay in the trials. He observed that a successor Government ordering trial of 
their adversaries should do all that could convince everyone including the 
accused that they had the best of intentions and provided not only a fair 
procedure but the cleanest of judges. Justice Singhal’s "thoughtfull observation 
were commended by the Chief Justice in the main opinion of the Court. The 
majority, however, contended itself by suggesting, that the trial of the emergency 
personalities is not best” done by investing the High Courts with special 
jurisdiction. Instead of the Government nominating a particular judge, the 
Chief Justice of a High Court could exclusively assign a Judge. 

(e) Administrative Discretion. — Many a times the Act or statute instead 
of making the classification itself leaves this matter to the Executive officers. 
In such cases if the Act has laid down any principle or policy for the guidance 
of the exercise of discretion by the Government in the manner of selection or 
making classification then the statute conferring such power is not void as 
offending Art. 14. But where there is no policy or principle laid down for the 
exercise of the discretion by executives under the Act, the court will declare the 
law invalid. However, if the officer to whom the discretion is given himself 
acts arbitrarily in exercising the discretion then what has to be struck down is 
the statute itself but the executive action. 1 * 

In Anwar Alt's case.* discussed above, we have noted that a law was 
struck down by the Supreme Court on the ground that it did not lay down any 
definite policy or principle for guidance of the exercise of discretion by Govern- 
ment while in the Kathi Hanning's case, 3 similar law was upheld by the Supreme 
Court because the Court found in the statute a definite principle or objective 
clearly stated “to provide for public safety, maintenance of public order ana 
preservation of peace and tranquillity in the State” for the guidance of uovern- 

1. Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Justice Tendolkar, AIR 1958 S. C. 538. 

2- AIR 1952 S. C. 75. 

3. AIR 1952 S. C.123. 

Const. 11 



82 


CONSmUTtONAL tAW OP INUIA 


(Chap. 


mcnt or its officers in the exercise of their discretionary powers. The principle 
applied by the Court in both the cases is the same, namely, the law* should 
lay down the policy in clear and definite terms for the guidance of exercise of 
discretion by the executive officers. 

The Kerala Education Dill gave abroad power to the Government to 
control private schools. According to the Bill, the Government could recognise 
or not a newly established school, or it could take over any schools. It was 
contended that the wide discretion given to the Government offended Art. 14 of 
the Constitution. The Court rejected this contention and held that the general 
policy of the Bill was laid down in its preamble and title. The power given to 
the Government to take over schools could be exercised only for the purposes 
mentioned in the Bill and hence it is not hit by Art. 14 unless in implementing 
the policy, discrimination is in fact made.* 

In Organo Chemical Industries v. Union of India} the petitioner challenged 
the validity of an order passed by the Regional Provident Fund Commis- 
sioner by which he imposed a penalty on him as damages under section 14 B 
of the Employee’s Provident Funds Act, 1952, for delayed remittance of the 
employee’s provident fund, on the ground that the power conferred on the 
P. F. Commissioner is unguided, arbitrary and hence is violative of Article 
14 of the Constitution. The Supreme Court held that the power conferred 
under section 14 B of the Act on the Provident Fund Commissioner to impose 
damages on an employer defaulting in payment of contributions to the provident 
fund is not unguided nor arbitrary and hence, is not violative of Article 14. 
The power of the P. F. Commissioner to impose damages under section 14 B 
is a quasi-judicial function and must be exercised after notice to the 
defaulter and after giving him reasonable opportunity of being heard. The 
discretion to award damages could only be exercised within the limits fixed by 
the Act. An order under section 14 B must be a ‘speaking order* containing the 
reasons in support of it. White fixing the amount of damages, the P. F. 
Commissioner usually takes into consideration various factors the word damage 
in section 14B lays down sufficient guidelines for him to levy damages. The 
mere absence of provision for an appeal docs not imply that the P. F. Commis- 
sioner is vested with arbitrary or uncontrolled power, without any guidelines. 
It is dependent oa existence of certain facts. There has to be an objective deter- 
mination, not subjective. The P. F. Commissioner has not only to apply his 
mind to the requirement of section 14 B but is cast with the duty of making 
a "speaking order" after conforming to the rules of natural justice. 

(f) A single individual may constitute a class .—Chiranjt Lai v. The Union 
of India 9 is the leading case on this point. The facts of the case were that 
owing to mismanagement in Sholapur Spinning and Weaving Company Limited 
the management threatened to close down the Mill. The Government of India 
passed the Sholapur Spinning and Weaving Co. (Emergency Provision) Act 
empowering the Government to take-over the control and management of the 
company and its properties by appointing their own directors. The Act was 
challenged by a shareholder of the company on the ground that a single com- 
pany and its shareholder is being denied equality before the law. because the 
Act treated them differently m-a-vi* other companies and their shareholders. It 
was pointed out that the law in the case has selected one particuler company 

1. In re, Kerala Educalion Bill, AIR 1958 S.C. 956. 

2. AIR 1979 S. C. 1803. 

3. A\Rt|51S.C.6\. See also Ram Krishna Dalmiav. Juslice Tendolkar, AIR 1958 



8 ] 


RIGHT TO EQUALITY 


83 


and its shareholders and has taken away from them the right to manage their 
own affairs but the same treatment ha* not been meted out to all other 
companies or shareholders in an identical manner. 

The Supreme Court held the Act valid. It said that a law may be consti- 
tutional even though it applies to a single individual If, on account of some 
special circumstances or reasons applicable to him and not applicable to 
others, that single individual may be treated as a class itself, unless it is shown 
that there are others who are similarly circumstanced. The presumption is 
always in the favour of the enactment and the burden is on the petitioner who 
attacks the validity of the legislation to place all materials before the Court 
which would show that the selection is arbitrary and unreasonable. The legisla- 
ture is free to recognise the degree of barm and it may confine its restrictions 
to those cases where the need is deemed to be the clearest. 1 * 3 In the present case 
the Sholapur Company formed a class by itself, because the mismanagement 
of the Company’s affairs prejudicially affected the production of an essential 
commodity and had caused a serious unemployment amongst labourers, 
Mukberjee, J„ observed, “we should bear in mind that a corporation, which 
is engaged in production of a commodity vitally essential to the community, 
has a social character of its own and ft must not be regarded as the concern 
primarily or only of those who invest their money in it. If its possibilities arc 
large and it bad a prosperous and useful carrier for a long period of time and 
is about to collapse not for any econmic reason but through sheer perversity 
of the controlling, one cannot say that the legislature has no authority to treat 
it as a class by itself and make special legislation applicable to it alone in the 
interest of the community at large. 

The picking of Bakshi Ghulam Mohammad out of the entire cabinet for 
the purpose of enquiry is not discriminatory or violative of Art. 14. The 
notification under section 3 of Jammu and Kashmir Inquiry Act of 1962 
whereby an Enquiry Commission was appointed to go into the charges of 
corruption cannot be called bad as 'violating equality before law’. It was held 
that Qakshi Ghulam Mohammad formed a class by himself and there was no 
question of violation of Art. 14. of the Constitution.* 

In Ammeerunnlsa Begun: v. bfahboob Begum* on the death of the Nawab 
of Hyderabad a dispute between two rival parties regarding succession to his 
property arose which resulted in protracted litigation. In order to put an end 
to this long-standing litigation the Hyderabad Legislature passed the Wali-ud-' 
Dowla Succession - Act, 1950. ‘By this Act the claims of one party, j e., two 
ladies was dismissed and the property was adjudged to the other party. The 
Act was challenged on the ground that it deprived the petitioners the right to’ 
enforce their claims in a court of law and thus discriminated them' from the 
rest of the community in respect of a valuable right which the law secures to 
all. The Government justified the classification mainly on the ground that the 
Act was passed - to put an end to a loDg-standing litigation. ' The object of the 
Act was thus to put an end to this long-standing dispute. The Supreme Court" 
held the Act unconstitutional on the ground that it did not furnish any reason- 
able basis for the discrimination made ' by it. The Court said that the conti- 
nuance of a dispute even for a long time between two sets of rival claimants 
to the property of a private person is not such an unusual circumstance by 

I. Radke v. New York, 264 U. S. 290 at .292. ... ■. 

2 Stale of J. and K. v. Bakshi Ghulacn Mohammad, AIR J967S.C 122. See also 
B. K. Dev v. Slate of Orissa, AIR l°64 S. C. 1501. 

3. AIR 1953 S. C. 91. 


84 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 

itself justifying its differentiation from all other cases of succession disputes. 
The exceptional circumstances which were present in the Chiranjit Lai s case 
were not present in this case. Where the law affects the community as a whole 
the court will assume the existence of some reasonable ground for sustaining 
the classification made by it. In ChlranIJt Lai's case, the Court justified its 
decision on the ground that the closure of the company had affected the pro- 
duction of an essential commodity and caused serious unemployment amongst 
labourers. In the present case, the dispute was between private parties and no 
interest of the community was involved. 

In Ram Prasad v. Stale oj Bihar ' the Supreme Court applied the same 
principle and held the Dihat Satin* Land (Restoration) Act, 1950, invalid. In 
1946 the appellants were granted a lease of land by the Court of Wards, There 
was an agitation amongst the tenants of the locality against the lease held by 
the appellants. The matter was referred to the Congress Working Committee. 
In the view of the Congress Committee the settlement was illegal and accord- 
ingly the lessees were asked to vacate the land. The lessees refused to vacate 
the land thereupon the Bihar Legislature passed the impugned Act. By the Act 
the appellant’s lease was cancelled. The Supreme Court held the Act unconsti- 
tutional on the ground that the dispute was a legal dispute between two private 
parties and it was a matter for determination by duly constituted courts in 
accordance with normal procedure. But what the Legislature has done was to 
single out certain individuals and deprived them of the right which every Indian 
citizen possesses to have his rights adjudicated upon by a court of law accord- 
ing to law applicable to him. Delivering the majority judgment of the Court 
Patanjali Sastri, C. J., said : “This is purely a dispute between private parties 
a matter for determination by duly constituted courts to which it is entrusted, 
in every free and civilized society ; the important function of adjudging on 
disputed legal rights after observing the well-established safeguards which 
include the right to be heard, the right to produce witnesses and so forth. This 
is the protection which the law guarantees equally to all persons. The appel- 
lants have been denied this protection. A political organisation of the party 
in power decides after making such inquiry as it thought fit that the settlement 
in question was contrary to the provisions of law and public policy and the 
State Legislature basing itself on the decision purports to declare the settlement 
‘null and void’ and directs the eviction of the appellants and the restoration 
of the land to the other parties, legislation such as this is calculated to drain 
the validity form the rule of law which the Constitution so notably proclaims 
and it is hoped that the democratic process in this country will not function 
along these lines.” On behalf of the Government the Attorney-General con- 
tended that the presumption is always in favour of the constitutionality of the 
enactment. But the Court said that where on the face of a statute there is no 
classification at all, and no attempt has been made to select any individual or 
group with reference to any differentiating attribute peculiar to that individual 
or group and not possessed by othets, this presumption is of little or no assis- 
tance to the Slate. ...» and to carry the presumption to the extent of 

holding that there must be some undisclosd and unkown reason for subject- 
ing certain individuals or corporations to hostile and discriminatory legislation 
is to make the protection clauses of the 14th amendment a mere rock of 
sand." 

A. INSTANCES-GENERAL 

R. C. Cooper v. Union of India' (The Bank Nationalisation case)— On July 
1- At*. W55 s. c. MS. 



81 


EIGHT TO EQUALITY 


85 


19, 1969 the Central Government issued an Ordinance nationalising 14 named 
Commercial Banks having deposits exceeding Rs. 50 crores. On August 
9, 1969, the Ordinance was replaced by the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1969. The petitioners challenged the 
validity of the Ordinance and the Act on the ground, inter alia, that they 
make unreasonable classification and thereby infringe their fundamental rights 
guaranteed in Art. |4 of the Constitution. On behalf of the Government it was 
justified on the ground that the 14 named banks were selected for special 
treatment because they were having deposits of not less than Rs 50 crores in 
comparison with other banks not selected. 

The Court held that by prohibiting the 14 named banks from carrying on 
banking business, whereas other banks— Indian as well as foreign— are permit' 
ted to carry on banking business a flagrantly hostile discrimination is practised 
by the State. Section 15 (2) of the Act which by the clearest implication 
prohibits the named banks from carrying on banking business is, therefore, 
liable to be struck down. The named banks are, though in theory competent, 
but in substance prohibited from carrying on non-banking business. 

It was held that the restriction was nnreasonable and the guarantee of 
equality is impaired by prohibiting the named banks from carrying on the non- 
banking business. 


K. A . Abbas v. Union of India. 1 — la this case the validity of Cinemato- 
graph Act, 1952, was challenged on the ground that it makes unreasonable 
classification. Under the Act, cinema films are classified into two categories, 
viz., ‘U’ films aDd ‘A’ films, according to their suitability for adults or young 
people. ‘U’ films are meant for unrestricted exhibition, while *A’ films can 
only be exhibited to adults. It was argued that motion picture is a form of 
expression and therefore, entitled to equal treatment with other forms of expres- 
sion. The petitioners contended that there are other forms of speech and expres- 
sion besides the films but none of them have been subjected to any prior 
restraint. He claimed that tbe treatment of motion picture on different 
footing from other forms of art and expression is invalid classification. The 
Court said, “the treatment of motion picture must be different from that of 
other forms of art and expression. This arises from the instant appeal of the 
motion picture, its versatility, realism (often surrealism), and its co-ordination 
of the visual and aurel senses- Tbe motion picture is able to stir up emotions 
more deeply than any other product of art. Its effect particularly on children 
and adolescents is very great since their immaturity makesthem more willingly 
suspend their disbelief than mature men and women. They also remember 
the action in the picture and try to imitate what {, h % l 

classification of films into two categories of . U ? nd ^ 

reasonable classification. It is also for this reason that motion picture mast be 
regarded differently from other forms 

mg a book or other writing or hearing a speech Therefort. 

B. NO 

RACE. W IB. );cat j onofthc general principle 
Article 15 provides for a P a ^“ f, r wit K^ 3 the prohibition of Art. 15 
embodied in Art. 14. When a law comes wi w applying the principle of 
>t cannot be validated by recourse *° t . " crjnl j na tion is based upon one of 
reasonable classification.* It J* wben lbe ° 


AIR 1932 Mid- «93. 



86 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


(Chap. 


the grounds mentioned in Art. 15 the reasonableness of the classification will 
be tested under Art. 14. 

The guarantee under Art. 15 is available to citizens and not to every 
person ‘whether citizen or non-cittzen' as under Art. 14. 

The first clause of Art. 15 directs the State not to discriminate against a 
citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth or any 
of them. The second clause prohibits citizens ns well as the dates from 
making such discrimination with regard to access to shops, hotels, etc., and 
all places of public entertainment or public resort, wells, tanks, roads, etc. 
The first clause of Art. 15 mentions the prohibited grounds in any matter 
which is exclusively within the control of the State. Tbe second clause pro* 
hibits both the State and the private individual whosoever in the control of 
tbe public places mentioned io th3t clause. The third clause gives power to 
the State to specially protect wotoeu and children. Tbe fourth clause nad been 
added to Art. 15 by the Constitution First (Amendment) Act, 1951, in 
order to give special protection to backward classes or Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes and extend them an exemption from Art. 15 and 
Art. :9 (2). 

Clatse (1)— By clause (I) of Article 15 the State is prohibited to discri- 
minate as between citizens on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place 
of birth or any of them. The word ‘discrimination' means to make an adverse 
distinction or to distinguish unfavourable from others. 1 If a law makes dis- 
crimination on any of the above grounds the law would be void. 

This in Natnsukhdas v. State of U.P a law which provided for election* 
on the basis of separate electorates for members of different religions, com- 
munities, was held to be unconstitutional. 

Similarly, in Stale of Rajasthan v. Pratap Sinyli* the Supreme Court 
invalidated a notification under the Police Act or 1851 which declared certain 
areas as disturbed and made the inhabitants of those areas to bear the cost 
of additional police stationed there but exempted all Harijans and Muslims. 
The exemption was given on the basis only of ‘caste’ or ‘religion' and hence 
was contrary to Article 15 (1). 


The word 'only used in this Article indicates that the discrimination can- 
not be merely on the ground that one belongs to a particular caste, sex, etc. 
In other words, if other qualifications are equal, caste, religion, sex, etc. 
should not be a ground for preference or disability. It follows from this that 
discrimination _ on grounds other than religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth 
is not prohibited. It means that a discrimination based on any of these 
grounds and also on other grounds is not hit by Article 15(1). 

In D. P. Joshl v. State of jl f B.+ it was held that a law which discrimi- 
nates on the ground of residence does not violate Article 1 5 (I). In the case 
a rule of the State Medical College requiring a capitation fee from non-Madhya 
Bharat Students for admission to the college was held valid as the ground 


Kathi Ranning v. Stale ofSaurashtra, AIR 1932 S.C. 123. 
AIR 1933 SC 384. , t , . 

AIR I960 SC 1208. 


AIR 1933 SC 334 : See also (University of Marian v. 
Anjali v. Slate of West Bengal, AIR 1952 Cal. 825 
AIR 1971 SC 1439, 


Shantha Bat. AIR 1954 Mad. 67 i 
N. Vasundara v. State of Mysore, 



8 } 


Riant TO EQUALIty 


87 


of exemption was residence and not place of birth. Place of birth is different 
from residence. What Article 15 (1) prohibits is discrimination based on 
place of birth and not that based on residence. Similarly, the require- 
ment of a test in the regional languages for State employment does not con- 
travene Article 15 as the test is made compulsory for all persons seeking em- 
ployment. 1 A law relating to evacuee property is not repugnant to Article 
15 (l) though actually most of the persons to whom the provisions of the law 
would apply are likely to be Muslims. The law did not apply to Muslims 
alone on the ground of religion for if a non-Muslim falls wilhin the definition 
of “evacuee” then the law would equally apply to him. 2 3 4 * 

Clause (2). — Article 15 (2) is a specific application of the general pro- 
hibition contained in Article 15 (1). Article 15 (2) declares that no citizen 
shall be subjected to any disability, restriction or conditon on grounds only of 
religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them with regard to (a) access 
to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment, or 
lb) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads, and places of public resort, 
maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the 
general public. A ‘place of public resort’ means places which are frequented 
by the public like a public park, a public road, a public bus, ferry, public 
urinal or railway, a hospital, etc. . >• ' 1 < 

It is to be noted that while clause (1) of Article 15 prohibits discrimina- 
tion by the State ; clause (2) prohibits both the State and private individuals 
from making any discrimination. 


The object of Article 15 (2) is to eradicate the abuses of the Hindu 
social system and to herald a United Nation. The Madras Removal of Civil 
Disabilities Act punishes social disabilities. No law, custom or usage could 
authorize any person to prevent any Harijans, depressed classes or the like 
from having access to the public places mentioned in the Act. 


Clause (3) : Special Provision for Women and Children.— Article 15 (3) is 
one of the two exceptions to the application of Article 15, clauses (1) and (2). 
It says that nothing in Article 15 shall prevent the State from making any 
special provision for women and children. Women and children require 
special treatment on account of their very nature. Article 15(3) empowers 
the State to make special provisions for them. The reason is that “women’s 
physical structure and the performance of maternal functions place her at a 
disadvantage in the struggle for subsistence and her physical well-being 
becomes an object of public interest and care in order to preserve the strength 
and vigour of the race.” 8 Thus under Article 42 women workers can te 
given special maternity relief and a law to this effect will not infringe Article 
15(1) Again it would not be violation of Article 15 if educational institu- 
tions are established by the State exclusively for women. The reservation 
of seats for women in a college does note jffend against Article 15 (1).« In 
Yusuf Abdul Aziz State of Bombay* section 497 0 rthe Indian Penal Code 
which only punishes man for adultery and exempts the women from punish- 


1. P. Raghunadha Rao »• State of Orissa. AIR l«J On lu IIJI. 

2. M. D. Namaz 1 v. Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property, Madras, AIR 19J| 
Mad. 9 JO 

3. Muller v. Oregon. 52 L. Ed. 551. 

4 . Dattatraya v. State, AIR l^l Rotn. 3tl. 

5 AIR 1951 SC 3H ; *ee also ShahJiJ ». Mohd. AbJuius, AIR iW 3- ml K. 120. 



CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Chap. 


meat even though she may be equally guilty as an abettor was held to be 
valid since the classification was not based on the grounds of sex alone. 

Similar provisions apply to children. The provision of free education 
for children 1 or measures for prevention of their exploitation 2 would also 
not come within the inhibition of Article 15 (1). 

It has, however, been held that Article 1 5 (3) provides for only special 
provisions for the benefit of women and children and does not require that 
absolutely identical treatment as those enjoyed by males in similar matters 
must be afforded to them. 3 

Clause (4)— Special Provision for Advancement ol Backward 
Classes.— This clause is another exception to Cls. (1) and (2) of Article 15. 
It was added by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, as a result 
of the decision in Slate of Madras v. Champakam Dorairajan .* In that case 
the Madras Government reserved seats in State Medical and Engineering 
Colleges for different communities in certain proportions on the basis of 
religion, race and caste. The State defended the law on the ground that 
it purported to promote the social justice for all sections of the people as 
required by Article 46 of the Directive Principles of State Policy. The 
Supreme Court held the law void because it classified students on the basis 
of caste and religion irrespective of merit. The Directive Principles of State 
policy cannot override the Fundamental Rights. In another case an order 
requisitioning land for the construction of a Harijan Coloriy was held to be 
void under Article 15 (l). 4 

To modify the effect of these two decisions, Article 15 was amended by 
the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951. The State is by virtue of the 
addition of this clause empowered to make special provisions for the advance- 
ment or any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. After the amendment it would be 
possible for the State to put up a Harijan Colony in order to advance the 
interest of the backward classes. 

The provisions made in clause (4) of Article 15 is only an enabling pro- 
vision and does not impose any obligation on the State to take any special 
action under it. It merely confers a discretion to act if necessary by way of 
making special provision for backward classes. The class contemplated under 
the clause must be both socially and educationally backward. 

What are Backward classes is not defined in the Constitution. Article 
340 however, empowers the President to appoint a Commission to investigate 
the conditions of socially and educationally backward classes. On the basis 
of the report of the Commission, the President may specify who are to be 
considered as Backward Classes. The decision of the Government is, however, 
justiciable issue. The Court can consider whether the classification by the 


1. Article 4S says "The State shall endeavour lo provide within a period of ten years 
from the commencement of the Constitution for free and compulsory education for 
all childern until they complete ihe age of 14 years.” 

2 Article 39 (f) says, "The State shall particularly direct its policy towards securing 

; • ■ that childhood and youth are protected against erptoitmon uosuited 

to their age or strength." 


3. Afljali Roy v. State or West Bengal, AIR 1952 Cal. 825. 

4. AIR 1951 SC 226. 


5. Jagwant Hour v. State of Bombay, AIR 1952 Bom. 461. 



8 ) 


RIGHT TO EQUALITY 


89 


aI w ilr ? iy is b “ ed 00 an ,y intelligible and tangible principle, 
th'tfkl K ( ls ! ,na . S,l * 8 fl v- State of Mysore,' the Mysore High Court had held 
uiat the determination of backward classes made in 1959, on the basis of the 

°i 1941, ? D ,“ W , be s5 , id lo , bc bascd on intelligible principle 
as considerable changes had taken place between 1941 and 1951. V 

... ‘ Bac kward’ and ‘more backward’ classification Is bad.— In Balabji v. State 
oj Mysore, the Mysore Government issued an order under Article 15 f4) 
reserving scats in the Medical and Engineering Colleges in the State as 
lollows : Backward classes 28%. More backward classes 22%, Scheduled 
Castes and Tribes 18% thus 68% of the scats available in the Colleges were 
reserved and only 32% was made available to the merit pools. The validity of 
the order was challenged by candidates who had secured more marks than 
those admitted under the order. Though qualified on merit they had failed 
to get admission only by reason of the Government order. The Court held 
that the sub-classification made by the order between 'backward classes* and 
'more backward classes’ was not justified under Article 15(4). ‘Backward- 
ness* as envisaged by Article 15 (4) must be both social and educational and 
not either social or educational. Though caste may be a relevant factor 
but it _ cannot be the sole test for ascertaining whether a particular 
class is a backward class or not. Poverty, occupation, place of 
habitation may all be relevant factors to be taken into consideration. Art 
15 (4) docs not speak of 'castes’, but only speaks of ‘classes’, and ‘caste’ and 
'class’ are not synonymous. The impugned order, however, proceeds only on 
the basis of caste without regard to other relevant factors and that is sufficient 
to render the order invalid The Court said that the State was not justified in 
including in the list of backward classes all those castes or communities whose 
average or student population per thousand was slightly above or very near or 
just below the State average. Only those which were well below the average 
can be regarded as backward. Thus the main defect of the system adopted by 
the State is that under it 90% of the population of the State is backward. Jt 
was held that this is inconsistent with Article 15(4). Reservation of 86 per 
cent of seats in all technical institutions, such as. Engineering and Medical 
Colleges to the exclusion of all other candidates if a single candidate from 
the Scheduled Tribes was available, may amount to fraud upon the Constitu- 
tion. Clause (4) of Article 15 only enables the State to make special and not 
exclusive porvision for the backward classes. The State would not be justified 
in ignoring altogether advancement of the rest of the society in its zeal to 
promote the welfare of backward classes. National interest would suffer 
If qualified and competent students were excluded from admission in inatiturions 
of higher education. Speaking generally, the Court said, the special provision 
should be less than 50%. how much less than 50% would depend upon th- 
relevant prevailing circumstances in each case. 

In A. I'erialarupi'an v. State of Tamil Soda* the Supreme Court s., 
held that classification of backward cixtscs on basts of castes is wtli 
put view of Art. 15(4) provided those castes are shown to be soculJy 
educationally backward. Hut the Coast has also advised that the Govern-^ 

ft should continue a* bacWald (Uvt fot all Ihc time*. Such aa * rJ 
the Court laid. «outd defeat the tee? pun*"* of the feeeteanon. The 

I AIR wo Mrs. SM 

■* AIR SC W» . At*** see tun-linfeea Raw S.ft*h *. Suw c{ M/vcfp , 

* M,, 11, tt.lVjWVU s State ef Mp"t, AIK |*c« SC I i;i. s A! *- \>n A 

j air mi sc 

Corns.-- 12 



90 CONSTHtmONAL LAW OF INDIA [Chap. 

ment should always keep under review the question of reservation of scats 
and only the classes which are really, socially and educationally backward 
should be allowed to have the benefit or reservation. Reservation of. seats 
should not be allowed to become vested interest. ' The Government decision in 
this regard is open to judicial review. In State of A. P- v. U. S. V. Balaram ,* 
the Supreme Court has reiterated the observations made in the case of A. 
Periakaruppon State of Tamil Nadu* The Court said that though the caste 
of a person cannot be the sole test for ascertaining whether a particular class 
or community is backward class or not yet if an entire caste is, as a fact, found 
to be socially and educationally backward their inclusion in the list of backward 
classes by their name is not violative of Art. 15(4). A caste is also a class 
of citizens which may, as such, be socially and educationally backward If 
after collecting the necessary data, it is found that the caste as a whole is 
socially and educationally backward the reservation made for such persons will 
have to be upheld notwithstanding the fact that a few individuals in that 
group may be both socially and educationally above the general average. But 
it does not mean that once a caste is considered backward class it will continue 
to be backward for all the time. If a situation arises wherein the candidate 
belonging to the groups included in the list of backward classes are able to 
obtain more seats on the basis of their own merit, it is the duty of the Govern* 
ment to review the question of further reservation of scats for such groups. If 
once a class appears to have reached a stage of progress, from which it could 
be safely inferred that no further protection is necessary the State will do well 
to review such instances and suitably revise the list of backward classes. The 
decision of the Government in this regard is a justiciable issue. 

In K. S. Jayasree v. Kerala ,» the State of Kerala appointed a Commission 
to inquire into and to report as to what sections of the people in Kerala should 
be treated as socially and educationally backward classes. On the basis of the 
report of the Commission the Government directed that candidates belonging to 
families whose annual income was Rs. 10,000 or above would not be eligible 
for seats reserved for backward classes in Medical Colleges. The Supreme 
Court held the Government’s direction to be valid. The Court held that neither 
caste by itself nor poverty by itself is determining facior of social backwardness. 
Though poverty is not the sole test, of backwardness, but it is relevant factor 
in the context of social backwardness. Thus both caste and poverty is 
relevant in determining the backwardness of citizens. 

In Slate of U. P. v. Pradip Tandon,* the Utiar Pradesh Government made 
reservation of seats for admission to Medical Colleges in the State in favour of 
candidates coming from Rural Areas, Hill and Uttarakhand areas. The 
Supreme Court held that the reservation in favour of candidates coming from 
rural areas was unconstitutional but the reservation in favour of candidates 
coming from Hill and Uttarakhand areas was valid. The Hill and Uttara- 
khand areas in Uttar Pradesh are instances of socially and educationally back- 
ward classes of citizens. Backwardness is judged by the economic basis that 
each region has its own measurable possibilities for the maintenance of human 
members, standards of living and fixed property. From an economic point of 
view the classes of citizens are backward when they do not make effective use 
of resources. When large areas of land remain spares, disorderly and illiterate 

1. AIR 1972 SC 1375. 

2. AIR 1971 SC 2303. 

3. AIR 1975 SC 2381. 

4. AIR 1973 SC 553. 



8 ] 


■ RIGHT TO EQUALITT 


91 


population whose property is small and negligible the element of social back- 
wardness is present. When effective territorial specialisation is not possible in 
the absence of means, communication and technical processes as in the hill and 
Uttarakhand areas the people are socially backward classes of citizens. People 
in the hill and Uttarakhand areas are also the educationally backward classes 
of citizens because lack of educational facilities keeps them stagnant and they 
have neither means and values nor awareness for education. Where people 
have traditional apathy for education on account of social and environmental 
conditions or occupational handicaps, it is an illustration of educational back- 
wardness. The hill and Uttarakhand areas are inaccessible. There is lack of 
educational institutions and educational aids. The reservation for rural areas 
cannot be sustained on the ground that the rural areas represent socially and 
educationally backward classes of citizens. Tho reservation is made for the 
majority population of the State. 80 per cent, of the population of the State in 
rural areas cannot be a homogeneous class by itself. They are not of the 
same kind. Their occupation is different. Their standards are different. 
Population cannot be a class by itself. Rural element does not make it a class. 
The special need for medical men in rural areas will not make the people in the 
rural areas socially and educationally backward classes of citizens. Poverty 
in rural areas cannot also be the basis of classification to support reservation 
for rural areas. Poverty is found in all parts of India. 

In Padmraj Samarerulro v. State,'- the Patna High Court has upheld the 
reservation of “Cultural seats” for the admission to the medical fcolleges. In 
the instant case out of 670 scats 43 scats were to be filled up by nomination. 
6 out of 43 seats are available for Nepalese students, 23 seats were placed at 
tho disposal of the Government to be filled up by nomination under the bead— 
"Cultural seats”— from out of candidates belonging to foreign countries, Naga- 
land, Sikkim and Bhutan for State reasons. This reservation for Napalese 
students cannot be said to be without any reasonable nexus. Relationship with 
Napal has for State reasons to be as cordial as possible. The lack of sufficient 
medical education in Nepal is also well known fact. So also is the case with 
23 seats to be filled up by the Central Government. Candidates of foreign coun- 
tries are to be nominated by the Government of India on account of recipro- 
cal arrangments or for other State reasons. The economic and educational 
backwardness of citizens in these countiies is a notorious fact. The policy of 
appeasement and maintenance of good relationship with these three territories 
is equally important. None of these can be said to be unreasonably excessive. 

In Janardhan Subbaraya V. State of Mysore* it was held that the decision 
in Balaji's case only applied to reservations made in regard to socially and 
educationally backward classes ; and hence reservations made by the Mysore 
Government order in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, were 
not effected by the decision. It remained valid in spite of the impugned order. 

An order was made bv the Kerala Government reserving seats In the 
Medical College of Kerala lor (a) lizahara Muslim and Larin Cal holies on 
the ground that they belonged to socially and educationally backward classes, 
(b) in favour of children of registered medical practitioners, (c) for outstanding 
sportsmen. The reservation was challenged in State of Kerala v. /?. Jacob* on 
the ground that ii violated Article 14. The Court struck down the reservation in 
favour of the children of medical practitioners on the ground that it was 

1. AIR 1974 Patna 266 (1*. It ) 

2. AIR !*« SC 702. 

J. AIR 1464 M 



92 


CONSTlTtmoNM. LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


based on a classification which had no rational rclatton to the object to be 
secured. It upheld the reservation for outsanding sportsmen on the ground 
that it was based on a valid classification. It also upheld tbe reservation m 
favour of Ezhavas, etc. on the ground that they belonged to socially and edu- 
cationally backward classes. The reservation in their favour is permissible 
under Article 15 (4) and the respondent had failed to prove that they did not 
belong to backward classes. 

But in Chamaraja v. State of Mysore, 1 ad order reserving 30% of seats 
in professional and technical colleges for socially and educationally backward 
classes but making the reservation available only to the extent that they did 
not get adequate representation in tbe merit pool was held valid by tbe Mysore 
High Court. It means that if backward class students by merit can secure 
more seats than the number reserved under Article 15 (4) they arc entitled to 
do so. 

In Guntur Medical College v. Mohan Rao ,* an important question arose 
before the Court as to whether a person belonging to Christian converts, who 
originally belonged to a scheduled caste, on reconversion to Hinduism can 
claim the benefit of reservation of seats in a medical college under Atricle 15 
(4) of the Constitution. The Court held that a person whose parents belonged 
to a scheduled caste before their conversion to Christianity can, on reconversion 
to Hinduism is legarded as a member of the scheduled caste only if he is 
accepted as a member of that caste by the other members of the caste. On 
such acceptance he would be eligible for the benefit of reservation of seats for 
scheduled caste in the matter of admission to a medical college. 

C. EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY IN PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT 
(Article 16) 


Clauses (1) and (2) of Article 16 guarantee equality of opportunity to all 
citizens in the matter of appointment to any office or of any other employment 
under the State. No citizen can be discriminated against or be ineligible for 
any employment or office under the State on grounds only of religion race 
caste, sex. descent, place of birth or residence. Clauses 3, 4 and 5 of Art 16 
arc the three exceptions to this general rule of equality of opportunity. 

It is to be noted that under Article 16 the guarantee against discrimina- 
tion is limited to ‘employment and appointment’ under the State Article 15 
however, is more general and deals with all cases of discrimination which 
not fall under Article 16. Article 16 embodies the particular application of 
general rule of equality laid down in Article 14 with special reference for 
appointment and employment under the State. 3 

Article 16 guarantees equality of opportunity in matters of appointment 
m State services. . It does not, however, prevent the State from prescribinz 
the necessary qualifications and selective tests for recruitment for Government 
services. The qualifications prescribed may, beside mental excellence meta- 
physical fitness, sense of discipline, moral integrity, loyalty to the State 
Where the appointment requires technical knowledge technical qualification 

1. AIR 1967 Mys. 21. 

2. AIR 1976 SC 1904. 

3 - sSSMSSK-iSMltoKb*" 1 ”” p *'- “ 7 - f °"™ d 



8 ] 


FIGHT TO EQUALITY 


93 


may be prescribed. The character and antecedents of candidates may be taken 
into consideration for appointment in Government services. 1 

The selective test, however, must not be arbitrary. It must be based on 
reasonable ground and have nexus between the qualifications and the object, 
that is, the post or the nature of the service. In Pandurangarao v. Andhra 
Pradesh Public Service Commission, 3 the petitioner who was a lawyer in some 
district of the State, was applicant for the selection of the posts of District 
Munsiffs under the State Judicial Service. He was qualified iD every respect, 
except that he was not at that time practising as aD advocate in the Andhra 
High Court. The Supreme Court held that the rule which required that only 
a lawyer practising the High Court and the notification issued thereunder 
were unconstitutional. There was no reasonable Dexus between the qualification 
and the alleged object of an applicant possessing a knowledge of the local laws 
which could be acquired by any lawyer practising in any court. For appoint- 
ment to a particular post a minimum educational qualification can be prescrib- 
ed. Thus, a requirement that the professor in orthopaedics must have a 
postgraduate degree in that subject is valid.* An appointment to an 
ex-cadre selection post can be made on the ground of seniority only. The 
Government can appoint to such posts such persons to whom it considers aj 
most suitable and the Court will upheld such an appointment unless it is done 
mala fide.* 

Equality of opportunity in matters of employment can be predicated only 
as between persons who arc cither seeking the same employment or have 
obtained the same employment, and that “equality of opportunity in matters of 
promotion must mean equality between members of the same class of employees 
and not equality between members of separate independent classes." Thus 
in All-India Station Master's Association v. General Manager, Central Railway* 
a rule enabling guards to be promoted to higher grade Station Master than 
the road side station masters was held not to be violative of Article 16 as 
■Road side Station Masters and Guards were recruited and trained separately 
and had separate avenues of promotion, they belong to two distinct and 
separate classes between whom there was no scope for predicating equality or 
inequality of opportunity in matters of promotion. Similarly, Article 16 does 
not fotbid the creation of different grades in the Government service. Thus 
where the rules made Income Tax Officers of Class I eligible for appointment 
as Assistant Commissioners, but docs not m3ke Income Tax Officers. Class fl 
eligible for appointment as Assistant Commissioner, it was held that there can 
be no question of denial of equality of opportunity. But if different standards 
of promotion ate laid down in relation to the same class of Income Tax Officers 
Article 16 would be violated.® 

There is no denial of equaliiy if the service rule permits premature retire- 
ment of Government servants T 


Suealba Prasad v. State of Kerala, AIR 1963 Kerala 19 ; Also tec Bam nidi i 
V. Slate of U. P., A JR 1956 SC SIO. 

AIR 1963 SC 268. 

Union of India v. Dr. S. B. Kohti, AIR 197J SC 8It. 

3. N. Sharro* v. Bihar, AIR 1971 SC »1«- 
AIR 1960 SC 384. 


Klshori v. Union «r India. 1967 SC IIW ; Also see State of Punjab v. Joftedri Sinjb, 
AtR 1963 SC 913 ; Champak Lat v. Union of India. AIR 1964 SC 1151. 

Jaisinyhan v. Union of India, AIR 1964 punj. US 



94 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA {Chap. 

The expression “matters relating to employment" shows that Article 16 
ts not confined to initial matters but will apply to matters subsequent to 
appointment as well e. g., promotions, 1 termination of employment,* matters 
relating to salary, periodical increments, leave, gratuity, pension and the age 
of superannuation, etc. 8 

Equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment 
is not violated by provisions for compulsory retirement of Government servants 
in public interest after the completion of qualifying service or attainment 
of a certain age because compulsory retirement does not involve _ any civil 
consequences. 4 

In P. R. Naidu v. Government of A. P., h the petitioners weie retired com- 
pulsorily in public interest. They challenged the compulsory retirement orders 
as violative of Article 16. It was, however, held that the provision for com- 
pulsory retirement io public interest applies to all Government servants and 
as such it is not open to challenge either under Article 14 or under Article 16, 
Article 16 does not prohibit the prescription of reasonable rules for compul- 
sory retirement. 

In State of Oritsa v. N. N. Swamif a private College was t3ken-over by 
the Orissa Government. The petitioners were working as Readers in different 
faculties In the aforesaid college in the scale of pay of Rs. 510-860, whereas 
scale for Readers was Rs. 600-1000. On the date of take-over each of the 
respondents were drawing a salary somewhere less than Rs. 600. The Gov- 
ernment issued a Circular containing conditions governing taking over the 
services of the teaching staff of the College. It was provided that the cases 
of staff shall be referred to the Orissa Public Service Commission for deter- 
mination of their suitability to hold posts. Those found suitable by the 
Commission shall be absorbed io respective cadre. While making reference 
to the P. S. C. cases of those Readers who were drawing a salary of Rs. 600 
p. m. would be referred. Readers who on the date of take-over were in receipt 
of pay of less than Rs. 600 shall be given the post of lecturers, in the scale of 
Rs 260-780. The respondents contended that although they had all the requi- 
site qualifications for appointment as Readers, before the take over but 
since under the aforesaid terms of take over they were drawing a salary of 
less than Rs. 600/- on the date of take-over, their names were not referred 
to the P.S.C. for consideration of their suitability for appointment as Readers. 
They claimed that the condition of drawing of Rs. 600 or more on the date 
of takeover which has been laid down iu the said Circular as particular qua- 
lification for eligibility for appointment as Readers is arbitrary and discri- 
minatory. This condition has no nexus, whatever, with the object underlying 
the qualification test in an educational institution having regard to the most 
essential question of intrinsic quality and efficiency of the teachers. 

The Supreme Court held that all the respondents were eligible to be 
referred to the P. S. C. for the post of Readers. The Court said that there 

1 General Manager, Southern Railway v. Rangachari, AIR 1962 SC 36. 

2. Union of India v. P. K. More, AIR 1962 S C 630. . 

3. General Manager. Southern Railway v. Rangachari, AIR 1962 S C 36. • 

4. Unioo of India v. J. N. Sinha, AIR 197t SC 40 : Tara Singh v. Stale of Rajasthan, 

AIR 1975 SC 1487. ( , 

5. AIR 1977 SC 854 : see also Shivcharan Singh v. Stats of Mysore. AIR 1965 
SC 28a 

6. AIR 1977 S C 1217. 



8) ' right ro equality 95 

may be no difficulty in accepting this position that Government can screen 
the teachers at the time of fresh appointment in the Government service after 
takingover any institution from private management. It may provide stringent 
qualification for appointment. If the private employers did not fulfil the 
qualifications, experience, they may not be eligible for appointment. Such a 
position, if taken by the Government, is consistent with implementation of a 
correct ‘educational policy and will not be violation of Article 16 of the Cons- 
titution. But the question is entirely different, when the employees answering 
the test of educational qualifications and experience of teaching io a recognis- 
ed private college arc discriminated amongst the very category of Readers on 
an irrational and illusory consideration such as particular amount of salary, 
on a specified date. Denial of an opportunity to such Readers even for 
being considered for the post of Readers is clearly violation of Art. 16 of the 
Constitution. The teaching experience of the Readers in the private institutions 
is not completely obliterated after it* take-over by the Government. 

Clause (2). — It is to be noted that the two additional grounds “descent’’ 
and “residence” not included in Article 15 have been added m Article 16 (2). 
No discrimination can be made on these grounds. This is just to assure that 
parochialism and nepotism is eliminated in the matters of appointment in 
Government services. The provincial slogan Madras for Madrasis . Bengal 
for Bengalis’ and. ’Mysore for Mysoreans’ are most unhealthy for the growth 
of a truly federal democracy’. The systems of the British r :ra have to be 
eliminated in independent India and hence this P r o v,SIO “ , “^ r *' c l e 
•Descent’ is another spot for individual discrimination. In Dasaratha Rama 
Raov. Stale "the Supreme Court held that the office of the village Munsjf is 
an office under the State : and section 6 (1) of the ‘ jgJjTijJ 1 

the Collector to select persons from among the last bo der of the office dis 
criminates on the ground? of descent only and hence void for contravening 
Article 16 (2). 

Clause (3).— Article 16 (3) is an exception to clause (2) of this Article 
which f^bids discrimination in. .he ground of ’r^esiS 

may be good reasons Tor reserving certain posts in a State for the residents 
only. This Article empowers Parliament to regulate by law the extent to 

Asti 

the Pnhlic FmDlovment (Requirement as to Residence) Act, u provides 

that no one S be disqualified on the ground that one is not the residen 
of a particular State However, the Act mates an esception for employment 

of theA«7netsUm“onal 5 w'hi”h p^’ibld' 

Government services in the State and nm p JrK 

of l s»" lnd .hte ore ‘rtsSnS quafifi'stion can be prescribed for , he 
whole of the Stale Though Parliament can 

Pradesh for the residents of the State, but ,1 cannot reserws posts m Talangana 
fot the residents ofTelangana only, which is a part of the Stale. 

,. AIR 1961 SC 564 : Also see Balkmlie. Hegde v. Shank.,, ltafc AIR 1962 Mys. 

233. 


2, AIR 1970 SC 422. 



98 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chsp. 


rules for promotion of employees working in the Registration Department 
Jrom the lower division clerks to the higher post of upper division clerks. 
inIS w depended on passing departmental tests within two years. 
KUie 1J3-A however empowered the State Government to further exempt 
* Bed period members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
'X F “’ 3 tbc tcsL Pursuant thereto the Government passed the impugned 
wVJh5fiK!!2? ex “ , P t . ,on for two years to pass the test. This exemption 
of o d, i cr ' oia i a t°ry. under Art. 16 (1). A seven member Bench 

of 5 • P iLu (f a ch delivering a separate judgment) by a majority 

and Scheduled T a ? ^^'hcation of employees belonging to Scheduled Castes 
Sssing t«i nr f0r ,- ll0W . in8thcma “« teade d 0f ,W ° - fM 

nHSKtaBW 1 1S 3 i Uil aDd reasonable classification having 
in matters relating 0t ? cct of P rovid ' Q S equal opportunities for all citizens 
ten£ora™ Sll' 0 e “P 1 °y“«>t or appointment to the public office. The 
and Scheduled Tri£.° fleSt qualification made in favour of Scheduled C«t“ 
ness. Rule does no. ; ls . wa * rant ed in the services and their over all backward- 
members of Scheduled rlif. thc tes } °J F fficicnc y in administration in as much « 
have to acquire the nwJr^f* and , Scheduled Tribes who are promoted will 
that they^arc eranted .' fiCa,IOn of P assin 8 ‘he test. The only relaxation is 
ixaa — a .. 8 d two years more time to acquire the qualification. Rule 


e therefore valid. 


13 AA .if gra " ted two years more ti 
3 AA and thc ^ders made thereunder a 

ficaUo^cannSrS «?««£* G - Upta - JJ >) he,d that the P r ' Dci P les ®! a ^ 

535*2? Ar,.T6 c ( 4 fi d n a r d Castc? 

Of 10 tn the Classification and 


stes and Scheduiea jnm 

— v. nn> ,6 m V h r;ir-r u -. 10 w- In no case the Court has upheld 
of promotion amont and differential treatment for the purpose 

fications and were iiSSm?*** who P ossc sscd the same educational quali- 
catMr.™ ^ . e initially appointed » in . the same 


fications and were^inltl.i!^ 1 w - DO P osscss cd the same education n — _ 
category of posts. Khan!™ ?PP 0l ?* ed as in the present case to the same 
employees, even thouph J '’ ,? aid that exemption granted to a class of 
prescribed for promotion*™ 3 v3 ,tc £ P eriod from passing departmental test 
«rvicc. To promos 34 o..? 0 rl 0bvi0Us ^ * subversive of efficiency of 


prescribed for promotion P criod from passing d**-— r 

service. To promote 34 nn7° r <. obvious,J ' ** subversive of efficiency of 
departmental test and at th. ° f • P crson s although they have not passed the 
the departmental test can hardi m t t,me not to P r0fn °te those who have passed 
R K » submitted that theS™ . c ° nducivc to efficiency. Kbanna, J., pointed 
It w 0U M j* dangerous to -ft “d W V - ,ew «P«ssed by Khanna, J. is correct. 
,l,f , ! nci P ,c °f equality of '• lnil . tl ° r protection against the operation 

%Tr. Z \ authorization bv PP A* m this field beyond its express con- 

SS* 1 .- “ (1) 1. a tot'or V 6 Si , Tt ' “'"“"‘J- is also corn*' 

from 1 ,s an exception in general principles embodied in Art. H- 
h?“„I Ual,t . y un der Ar P M ^ ell* V.O)* Art - 16 0) has a different conten 
ne given m,f. «■ So Schedule Castes an J, 'scheduled Tribes can no 


from equality unde r ^£ P \T 1° Art - 16 (D 

make Ve A» ef f :ren,ial treatment ' “JSW” 1 ? Cas,cs and Scheduled Tribes can not 

apSdt i.vs (1) «»»*“ Oa .S' "• 16 (4) - The nai0 ' i,! ' vie S 

from enniiw banna an d Gunta vi po,Dt ooc °f the majority judge Beg, J- 
rrom equality under Art. ,V P ' a ' JJ - Art. 16 (1) have different content 



8 ] 


MOOT TO EQUALITY 


99 


backward. The appeal against the decision of the Court is pending in the 
Supreme Court. 

The whole policy of reservation is in fact a politically motivated policy 
coming down from British days— the divide and rule policy. It is against the 
interest of the nation and it can only be desired by those vested interests who 
wish to see people fighting each other. It has provoked a caste war which 
threatens to tear our social fabric as under. 1 Thus both legally and socially the 
policy of reservation can not be justified. 2 

Clause (5)— Article 16(5) is the third exception to the general rule laid 
down in Article 16 (1) and (2) which forbids discrimination iD public employ- 
ment on the ground of religion. Article 16 (5) says that a law which provides 
that the incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any religious 
or denominational institution dr any member of the governing body thereof 
shall be a person professing a particular religion or belonging to a particular 
denomination shall not be treated to be repugnant to this Article. 

D. ABOLITION OF UNTOUCH ABILITY — Art. 17 


Article 17 abolishes “untouchability" and forbids its practice in any 
form. The enforcement of any disability arising out of untonchability is to be 
an offence punishable in accordance with law.' It does not stop with a mere 

declaration but announces that this forbidden ‘untouchability* is not to be 
henceforth practised in any form. If it were so practised it shall be dealt with 
as an offence punishable in accordance with the law. 


•Untouchability’ is neither defined in the Constitution nor in the Act. 
The Mvsorc High Court has however held that the term is not to be under- 
stood in its literal or grammatical sense but to be understood as the ‘practice 
as it bad developed historically’ in this country. Understood in this sense, it 
is a product of the Hindu caste system according to which particular section 
amongst the Hindus had been looked down upon as untouchables by the other 
sections of that society. A- literal construction of the term would include 
oersons who are treated as untouchables either temporarily or otherwise for 
various reasons, such as, suffering from infectious diseases or on account of 
social observance such as are associated with birth or death or on account of 
bovcott resulting from caste or other dispute. In either case such 
JSSJ cla'm the 8 protection or benefit either of Article 17 or of the 1955 
Act. 8 • • 

In exercise of the powers conferred by Article 35, Parliament originally 
enacted the Untouchability (Offences) Act. .1955. This lAct prescribes punish- 
ment for the practice of untouchability. Thu Act has been amended by the 
mtouchability {Offences) Amendment Act. 1 976, m order to make the laws more 
stringent to remove untouchability from the society. I has also been renamed 
£lhe Protection of Civil Rights Act. 1955. Under the amended Art any dis- 
crimination on the gronndofnntouchability will be considered an offence. It 
SSTmposes a duty on public servants to investigate such offences It provides 
SSS f? public servant wilfully neglects the investigations of any offence purnsh- 
abk under this Act he shall be deemed to have abetted an offence punishable 
under this Act. 


1. The Hindustan Times. Feb. 11. 1980. 

2. Paraibigha and Dobia Villages in tbe Jehanabad Sub-^.s.oo of B.har. 

3. Devaraijah v. Padmanna, AIR 1958 Mjrs. 84. 



96 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA [Chap. 

Clause [4) Reservation for backAvard classes.— Article 16(4) is the second 
exception to the general rule embodied in Article 16 (1) and (2). It empowers 
the State to make special provision for the reservation of. appointments or 
posts in favour of any backward class of citizens 'Which it the opinion of 
the State are not adequately represented in the services under the State. 

Thus, Article 16 (4) applies only if two conditions are satisfied 

1. the class of citizens is backward i. e., socially and educationally, and 

2. the said class is not adequately represented in the service of the 

State. 

The second test cannot he the sole criterion. 1 

The expression “ Backward Classes" in Art. 16 (4) has been used in the 
same sense as in Art. 15 (4). The Supreme Court has considered the meaning 
and scope of the expression in a number of decisions. From these pronounce- 
ments the following propositions emerge : 

1. Articles 15 (4) and 16 (4) speak of 'classes’ only and, do not speak 
of 'caste’. 

2. ‘Caste’ by itself cannot be determining factor of backwardness, 
though it may be one amongst several factors. So, reservation can be made 
in favour of “backward classes" and not 'backward caste*. 'Caste’ and 'class 
are different expressions. 

3. The backward classes in the matters of backwardness comparable 
to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes. 

4. The backwardness must be both social and educational and not 
either social or educational. 

5. Social backwardness is in ultimate analysis the result of poverty. But 
pove rty by itself is not the determining factor of social backwardness. Poverty 
is relevant in the context of social backwardness. 

6. Reservation should not be excessive. 

. 7. Reservation can be made at the cost of efficiency in administration. 

In Balaji’s * case the Supreme Court held that the 'Caste’ of a person 
cannot be the sole test for ascertaining whether a particular class is a backward 
class or not. Poverty, accupation, place of habitation may all be relevant 
factors to be taken into consideration. Though the caste of a person 
cannot be the sole test for determining the backwardness of a dais, but if an 
entire caste is found to be socially and educationally backward it may be in- 
cluded in the list of Backward classes. However, the Court said that it does 
not mean that once a caste is considered backward class then it should con- 
tinue to . be backward for all the time. The Government should review the 
test and if a class reaches lbc state of progress where reservation is not neces- 
sary it should delete that class from the list of the backward classes.® 

Att. 164 (4) being an exception and should be construed strictly. It can- 



81 - 


RIGHT TO EQUALITY 


97 


not be interpreted so rij to destroy the guarantee in Cl. (1) of Art, 16. It 
must be interpreted in the light of Art. 335 which says that the claims of the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into consideration 
consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of administration. 

Yhe reservation for backward classes should not be unreasonable. It 
should be considered having regard to the employment opportunities of the 
general public. 

The scope or Article 16 (4) was considered by the Supreme Court in 
Dmdasan V. Union of India.' In this case the constitution!! validity of the 
“catty-forward tele", framed by the Government to regelate appointment of 
persons of backward classes in Government services was involved, 
provided that if sufficient number of candidates belonging to the : Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes wete not available for appointment to be reserved 
quota, the vacancies that remained unfilled would be Heated as unreserved and 
filled by the Tresh available candidates 1 but a eareesponding number of posts 
•ill be 1 reserved in the neat year for Scheduled Otstes and Scheduled Tribes m 
addition to their reserved quota of the next year. The , d 

forward the unutilised balance, that it, unfilled nwaain the JSL“ were 
third years at one time. ' !n actual effect 68 pet cent, of the vacancies were 
reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tnbes. 

The Supreme Court by a majority of 4 t o I struck dovm the ^cariy fo^ 

ward’s, rule as unconstitutional on the as to deny reasonable 

Government under A.ticie 16 (4) cannot be so exetciKO las ro ^ c , aJKS 
equality of opportunity in mattets of public of tecniitment most be 

other than backward. The Court said that each year : communities each year 
considered by itself and the reservation for backwa . - UD( j u |y with 

Jhould not be excessive as to create a monopoly or court held that 

the legitimate claims of other comraunities.A ho °v much less thau half 

the reservation ought to be less than 50 per cent, but now muc 
would depend upon prevailing circumstances in ea 

In Venkataraman V. Stale of aciwarddass^rbut also ' for 

3? namely* SusfimTchrislnt. non-Btahmins aod Brahmins 

was held to violate Article 16. 

• - • r j the ‘State under Acticic 

‘ The power of reservation which ts conlerrea _ rov jding reservation of 

16(4) can be exercised by the State not on ^ . of selection posts. 8 Thus 

appointment but also for providing for reservatio s l n the rnatcer of 

selection posts can also be reserved for uacEva^ , Qt Tbc selection 
fiUmg selection posts, the question of seniority is not reieva 

is made solely on the basis of merit, 4 ’ . ; for 

.In Stole of Kerala v. N- M- "■^’"^^J'^JJn^ptie'w^ve preferential 
consideration of the Court as to whether it was p f bes under Art. 16 (1), outside 
treatment to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled * n Gove rnment framed 

‘be exception clause that is, Art. 16 (4). The Kera. 

1. AIR 1964 SC 179. followed in B. N. Tew.ti v. Uoioo ot lndu, AIR 1969 SC 
2- AIR 1961 SC 229. . atr 1962 SC 36. 

3 General Manager, Southern Railway v. _ ,,’.o • 

4- Dr. J. N. Mhhra v. Slate of B.har, AIR *971 SC 

5. AIR 1976 SC 490 : (1976) 2 SCC 310. 

Const. — 13 



93 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


rules for promotion of employees working in the Registration Department 
from the lower division clerks to the higher post of upper division clerks. 
The promotion depended on passing departmental tests within two years. 
Rule 133-A however empowered the State Government to further exempt 
for a specified period members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
from passing the test Pursuant thereto the Government passed the impugned 
order granting exemption for two years to pass the test. This exemption 
was challenged as discriminatory under Art. 16 (1). A seven member Bench 
or the Supreme Court (each delivering a separate judgment) by a majority 
of 5 : 2 beld that the classification of employees belonging to Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes for allowing them an extended period of two years for 
passing tests for promotion is a just and reasonable classification having 
rational nexus to the object of providing equal opportunities for all citizens 
in matters relating to employment or appointment to the public office. The 
temporary relaxation of test qualification made in favour of Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes is warranted in the services and their over all backward- 
ness. Rule does not impair tbe test of efficiency in administration in as much as 
members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes who are promoted will 
have to acquire the qualification of passing the test. Tbe only relaxation is 
that they are granted two years more time to acquire the qualification. Rule 
13 A A and the orders made thereunder are therefore valid. 

The minority (Kbanna and Gupta, JJ.,) held that the principles of classi- 
fication cannot be extended to give Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
preferential treatment outside Art. 16 (4). In no case the Court has upheld 
under Art. 16 (1) the classification and differential treatment for the purpose 
of promotion among employees who possessed the same educational quali- 
fications and were initially appointed as in the present case to the same 
category of posts. Khanna, J., said that exemption granted to a class of 
employees, even though for a limited period from passing departmental test 
prescribed for promotion would obviously be subversive of efficiency of 
service. To promote 34 out of 51 persons although they have not passed the 
departmental test and at the same time not to promote those who have passed 
the departmental test can hardly be conducive to efficiency, Khanna, J., pointed 
out. It b submitted that the minority view expressed by Khanna, J. is correct. 
It would be dangerous to extend the limits of protection against the operation 
of principle of equality of opportunity in this field beyond its express con- 
stitutional authorization by Art. 16 (4). The minority view is also correct 
that Art. 16 (1) is a facet of the general principles embodied in Art. 14. 
Article 16 (4) is an exception to Art. 16 (I). Art. 16 (1) has a different content 
from equality under Art. 14. So Scheduled Castes and Schedu'ed Tribes can not 
be given preferential treatment outside Art. 16 (4). The majority view will 
make Art. *6(4) redundant. On this point one of the majority judge Beg, J. 
agreed with Kbanna and Gupta. JJ„ that Art. 16 (I) have different content 
from equality under Art. 14. 

On the basis of the propositions made in the various decisions of the 
Court it is submitted that the recent reservation policy pursued by lanata 
Governments in the State of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh cannot be legally 
justified. 26 per cent reservation in Government jobs for backward castes were 
made in the State of Bihar and 15 per cent in Uttar Pradesh. The purpose 
of reservation under Art. 16 (4) was to help tbe weaker sections of society. 
But the ‘Castes’ mentioned as ‘backward’ both in U. P. and Bihar were not 
as whole poor. Many Ahirs, Kurmis, etc. arc rich farmer*. The Allahabad 
High Court has held that those castes are not socially and economically 



8 ] 


RIGHT TO EQUALITY 


99 


backward. The appeal against the decision of the Court is pending in the 
Supreme Court. 

The whole policy of reservation is in fact a politically motivated policy 
coming down from British days— the divide and rule policy. It is against the 
interest of the nation and it can only be desired by those vested interests who 
wish to sec people fighting each other. It has provoked a caste war which 
threatens to tear our social fabric as under.* Thus both legally and socially the 
policy of reservation can not be justified.* 

Clause (5).— Article 16 (5) is tbe third exception to the general rule laid 
down in Article 16 (1) and (2) which forbids discrimination in public employ- 
ment on the ground of religion. Article ! 6 (5) says that a law which provides 
that the incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any religious 
or denominational institution dr any member of the governing body thereof 
shall be a person professing a particular religion or belonging to a particular 
denomination shall not be treated to be repugnant to this Article. 

D. ABOLITION OF UNTOUCHABILITY — Art. 17 

Article 17 abolishes “untouchability" and forbids its practice in any 
form. The enforcement of any disability arising out of untouchability is to be 
an offence punishable in accordance with law. ; It does not stop with a mere 
declaration but announces that this forbidden 'untouchability’ is not to be 
henceforth practised in any form. If it were so practised it shall be dealt with 
as an offence punishable in accordance with the law. 

•Untouchability' is neither defined in the Constitution nor in the Act. 
The Mysore High Court has however held that the term is not to be under- 
stood in its literal or grammatical sense but to be understood as the 'practice 
as it bad developed historically’ in this country. Understood in this sense, ft 
is a product of the Hindu caste system according to which particular section 
amongst the Hindus had been looked down upon as untouchables by the other 
sections of that society. A literal construction of the term would include 
persons who are treated as untouchables either temporarily or otherwise for 
various reasons, such as, suffering from infectious diseases or on account of 
social observance such as are associated with birth or death or on account of 
social boycott resulting from caste or other dispute. In either case such 
persons can claim the protection or benefit either of Article 17 or of the 1955 
Act.® 

In exercise of the powers conferred by Article 35, Parliament originally 
enacted the Untouchability (Offences) Act, 1955. This Act prescribes punish- 
ment for the practice of untonchability. This Act has been amended ‘ by the 
Untouchability (Offences) Amendment Act , 1976, in order to make the laws more 
stringent to remove untouchability from the society. It has also been renamed 
as The Protection of Civil Rights Act , 1955. Under the amended Act any dis- 

crimination on the ground of untouchability will be considered an offence. It 
also imposes a duty on public servants to investigate such offences. It provides 
that if a public servant wilfully neglects the investigations of any offence punish- 
able under this Act he shall be deemed to have abetted an offence punishable 
under this Act. 

1. The Hindustan Times, Feb. 11, 1980. 

2. Parasbigha and Dohia Villages In the Jtbanabad Sub-division of Bibar. 

3. Devaraijab v. padmanna, AIR 195S Mys. 84. 



100 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


The Protection of Cirll Rights Act prescribes punishment which may 
extend to imprisonment upto sis months and also with a fine which may extend 
to five hundred rupees or both for anyone enforcing, on the ground of 
“untouchability” religious disabilities like— preventing any person from entering 
any place of public worship or from worshipping or offering prayers therein 
(section 3) or social disabilities like (S. 7) access to any shop, public restau- 
rants, hotels or places of public entertainment (S. 4) and refusing to admit 
persons to hospitals (S. 5) and refusing to sell goods or render services to any 
person (S. 6) or for other offences, arising out of ■untouchability’ (S. 7). 

It should be noted that Article 15 (2) also helps in the eradicction of 
untouchability. Thus on the grounds of untouchability no person can be 
denied access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertain- 
ment or the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, road and places of public resort, 
maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of 
general public. 

E. ABOLITION OF TITLES— Art. 18 

Article 18 prohibits the State to confer titles on any body whether a 
citizen or a non-citizen. Military and academic distinctions are however exempt- 
ed from the prohibition for they are incentive to further efforts in the perfec- 
tion of the military power of the State so necessary for its existence, and for 
the scientific endeavours so necessary for its prosperity. Clause (2) prohibits a 
citizen of India from accepting any title from any foreign State. Clause (3) 
provides that a foreigner holding any office of profit or trust under the State 
cannot accept any title from any foreign State without the consent of the 
President This is to ensure loyalty to the Government he serves for the time 
beiDg and to shut out all foreign influence in Government affairs or adminis- 
tration. Clause (4) provides that no person holding any office of profit or trust 
under the State shall accept, without the consent of the President any preseat, 
emolument or office of any kind from or under any foreign Slate. 

The recent confirmenl of titles as “Bharat Ratna”, “Padma Vibhuhsan”, 
“Padma Sbri”, etc are not prohibited under Art. IS as they merely denote 
State recognition of good work by citizens in the various fields of activity. 
These awards seem to fit in within the category of “academic distinctions”. 
Three national awards are given on the Republic Day in recognition of excep- 
tional and distinguished services of the high intagrity in any field. These awards 
which were abolished by the Janta Government in 1977 have been revived by the 
Congress Government in 1980. ' 

It is to be noted that there is no penalty prescribed for infringement of 
the above prohibition. Article 18 is merely directory. It is, however, open to 
Parliament to make a law for dealing with such persons who accept a title - in 
violation of the prohibition prescribed in Article L8. No such law has been 
passed by Parliament so far. 



9 

Right -to Freedom 
(Arts. IB to 22) 

, Introduction.— Personal liberty is the most important of all Fundamental 
Rights. Articles 19 to 22 deal with different aspects of this basic right. 
Taken together these four Articles form a Chapter of personal liberties which 
provides the backbone of the Chapter on Fundamental Rights. 

Tbe foremost amongst these are the seven fundamental rights in the 
nature of freedoms, which are guaranteed to tbe citizens by Article 19 of the 
Constitution. 

The Six Freedoms — Article 19 of the Constitution guarantees to the 
citizens of India the following six fundamental freedoms : 

(a) Freedom of Speech and Expression. 

(b) Freedom of Assembly. 

(c) Freedom to form Associations. 

• ■ (d) Freedom of Movement. . 

(e) Freedom to reside and to settle. 

*[(0 l***j Omitted by 44th Amendment Act, 1978. 

(g) Freedom of profession, occupation, trade or business. 

These 'six freedoms’* are, however, not absolute. Absolute individual 
rights cannot be guaranteed by any modern State. An organised society is tbe 
pre-condition of civil liberties. There cannot be any right which is injurious 
to the community as a whole. If people were given complete and absolute 
liberty without any social control the result would be ruin.' Liberty has got to 
be limited in order to be effectively possessed. For liberty of one must not 
offend the liberty of others. Patanjali Shastri, J., in A. K. Gopalan's case,* 
observed, "man as a rational being desires to do many things, but in a civil 
society bis desires have to be controlled, regulated and reconciled with tbe 
exercise of similar desires by other individuals. The guarantee of each of the 
above rights is, therefore, restricted by tbe Constitution itself by conferring 
upon the State a power to impose by law* reasonable restrictions as may be 
necessary in the larger interest of the community. The restrictions on these 
freedoms are provided in clauses 2 to 6 of Article 19 of the Constitution. 

Tbe restrictions which may be imposed under any of the clauses must be 
reasonable restrictions. The restriction cannot be arbitrary. Hence, a restric- 
tion to be constitutionally valid must satisfy the following two tests : — 

(1) the restriction must be for the purposes mentioned in clauses 2 ' to 6 
or Article 19 I 

(2) the restriction must be a reasonable restriction. 


•Originally Cl. (f) stood as “Freedom lo acquire, hold and dispose of property.” 

It has been omitted by Constitution («4tb Amendment) Art, 197S. 

|. Wills : Constitutional law and the United States, 477 

2. A. K. Copalan y. State of Madras, AIR 1951 SC 21 : CI9») SCR 



102 


Constitutional law op india 


^Cbap. 


Meaning of Reasonable Restriction.—' The pharase “reasonable restriction” 
in Art. 19 (6) means that the restrictions imposed on a person in the enjoyment 
of his right should not be arbitrary or of an excessive nature, beyond what 
is requited in the interests of the public. The word ‘reasonable* implies 
intelligent care and deliberation which reason dictates. A law which arbitrarily 
or excessively invades the right of a person cannot be said to contain the 
quality of reasonableness and unless it strikes a proper balance between the 
right guaranteed in Art. 19 (1) and the social control in Art. 19 (6), it must be 
held to be wanting in that quality. 1 2 3 The requirement that a restriction should 
be ‘reasonable’ means that it is for the courts to determine whether any restric- 
tion is reasonable or not. If the courts are of the opinion that a particular 
restriction is not reasonable then it will declare it void. The word ‘reasonable* 
thus widens the scope of judicial review and the determination by the Legis- 
lature as to what constitutes a reasonable restriction is not final and conclusive 
but subject to the supervision by the Supreme Court* However, there is no 
definite or absolute test to judge the reasonableness of a restriction. Bach case 
is to be judged on its own merits. The Supreme Court has laid down the 
following guidelines for determining the questions of reasonableness of a 
‘restriction* 

1. It is the courts and not the Legislature which has to judge finally 
whether a restriction is reasonable or not.* 

2. The term "reasonable restriction” in Art. 19 (6) connotes that the 
limitation imposed on a person in the enjoyment of his right should not be 
arbitrary or of an excessive nature, beyond what is actually required in the 
interests of the public. The word “reasonable” implies intelligent care and 
deliberation, that is, the choice, of a course which reason dictates. The expres- 
sion seeks to strike a balance between the individual rights guaranteed by 
Article 19 and the social control permitted by ‘clauses (2) to (6)’ of Article 19. 
Therefore, the restriction must have a reasonable relation with the object 
which the legislation seeks to achieve and must never exceed it. 'Legislation 
which arbitrarily or excessively invades the right cannot be said to contain the 
quality of reasonableness and unless it strikes a proper balance between the 
freedom guaranteed in Art. 19 and the social control permitted by Cl. (6) of 
Art. 19 it must be wanting in that quality. 4 5 6 

3. There is no exact standard or general pattern of reasonableness that 
can be laid down for all cases. Each case is to be judged on its own meric. 
The standard varies with the nature of the right infringed, the underlying 
purpose of the restrictions imposed, the extent and the urgency of the evil 
sought to be remedied, the disproportion of the imposition, the prevailing con- 
dition at the time. These factors have to be taken into consideration for any 
judicial verdict. 8 

4. The restriction must be reasonable from the substantive as well as 
procedural standpoint.® The court should consider not only tb? duration and 
extent of the restriction but also the circumstances under which and the 
manner in which that imposition has been authorised. 

1. Chintamani Rao v. Stale of M. P., AIR 1951 SC 11 8. 

2. Ibid. 

3. Ibid. 

A. Ibid. 

5. State of Madras v. V. G. Row, AIR 1952 SC 196. 

6. N- B. Khate v. State of Punjab, AIR 1950 SC 211. 



RIGHT TO FREEDOM 


103 


9 ] 


. 5. A restrict ion which is imposed for securing the objects laid down 

in the Directive Principles of State Policy may be regarded as reasonable 
restriction. 1 

6. The court must determine the reasonableness of a restriction by 
objective standard and not by subjective one. In other words, the question 
is not if the court feels the restrictions to be reasonable but what a Dormal 
reasonable man would regard the restriction to be reasonable. It is this need 
of objectivity which prompted the Supreme Court to warn the judges not to be 
guided by their own economic and social philosophy. It said “In evaluating 
such elusive factors and forming their own conceptions of what is reasonable 
in all the circumstances of a given case, it is inevitable that the social philo- 
sophy and the scale of values of the judges participating in the decision should 
play an important part, and the limit to their interference with legislative 
judgment in such cases can only be dictated by their sense of responsibility and 
self-restraint and the sobering reflection that the Constitution is meant not only 
for people of their own way of thinking but for all, and that the majority of 
the elected representatives of the people have, in authorising the imposition of 
the restriction, considered them to be reasonable. 3 

7. A restriction to be reasonable must have a rational relation with the 
object which the Legislature seeks to achieve and must not be in excess of that 
object. 3 The grounds for which the Legislature can impose restrictions are 
mentioned in clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19. 

8. It is the reasonableness of the restriction which is to be determined 
by the court and not the reasonableness of the law. The court has only to 
see whether the restrictions imposed on citizens’ rights are reasonable. The 
question whether a provision of the Act provides adequate safeguard against 
the abuse of power giveQ to the executive authority to administer the law, is 
not at all relevant. Mere possibility of the abuse of the power by the 
executive authority is not test for determining the reasonableness of the 
restriction.-* 

9. Reasonable restrictions may also amount to prohibition. Therefore, 
under certain circumstances, a law depriving a citizen of his fundamental right 
may be regarded as reasonable restriction only, in cases of dangerous trades 
such as that of liquor or cultivation of narcotic plants or trafficking in women, 
it would be a reasonable restriction to prohibit the trade or business altogether. 
The right of every citizen to pursue any lawful trade or business is obviously 
subject to such reasonable conditions as may be deemed proper by the govern- 
ing authority of the country essential to the safety, health, peace or decency and 
morals of the community. But where a restriction reaches the stage of prohi- 
bition, special care has to be taken by the court to see that the test of reason- 
ableness is satisfied. 8 

Rights available to Citizen only.— The rights granted by Art. 19 arc 
available only to citizens and not to an alien or a foreigner. A foreigner is not 
a citizen of India and therefore be cannot claim a right un-er Art. 19. 


1. P.ihumm* ». Slate of KctiIs, AIR I973SC77I ; ,5»“ *■ 

1951 SC 318 ; HanifQureshi v. Slate of Bihar. AIR 1958 SC 731. 

2. State of Madras v. V. G. Row. AIR 1952 SC 166 . (1952) SCR 597. 

3. Arunachala Nadar v. State of ”****• SC 30(X 

4 N B Khare v State of Delhi. AIR 1950 SC21t (217) , lVpwscK 3iy. , 

5. ' Narendra Kumar v Union of India. AIR 19*0 SC 430 I *- se t?/ 1 

Madras. AIR l'>60 SC 1030 ; Romesh Thapper v. Stife of Madras. AIR 1950 SC It*. 

6, Anwar v. State of J & K , AIR 1971 SC 337. 



104 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA (Chap, 

A. corporation or company can also not claim a right under Act. 19, 
because they are not natural persons. 'Citizens’ < under Art. 19 mean only 
natural persons and not legal persons, such as corporations or companies. ’ 
But now there is a definite change in the Judicial attitude on this point, 
in Bank Nationalisation Case z and the Newspaper case * the court has held, that 
though a company cannot claim a right under Art. 19, but its shareholders 
can claim the rights guaranteed by Art. 19, if by the State action the rights 
of the company as well as of the shareholder is impaired. The Fundamental 
rights of shareholders as citizens are not lost when they associate to form a 
company. 

A . FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND EXPRESSION 
[ARTS. 19 (1) (A) & 19 (2)] 

Freedom of speech and expression is indispensible in a democracy. In 
Romesh Tnapper v. Stale of Madras * Patanjali Sastri, J., rightly observed 
that : 1 ’ 

"Freedom of Speech and of the Press lay at the foundation of all demo- 
cratic organisations, for without free political discussion no public 
education so essential for the proper functioning of the process of 
popular Government is possible.’’, < 

Article 19 (1) (a) says that all citizens shall have the right to freedom 
of speech and expression. But this right is subject to limitations imposed 
under Article 19 (2) which empowers the State to put ‘reasonable’ restrictions 
on the following grounds, e. g., security of the State, friendly relations with 
foreign States, public order, decency and morality, contempt of court, defama- 
tion, incitement to offence and integrity and sovereignty of India. , 

Meaning and scope.— Freedom of speech and expression means the right 
to express one’s own convictions and opinions freely by words of mouth, 
writing, printing, pictures or any other mode. It thus includes the expression 
of one’s ideas through any communicable medium or visible representation, 
such as, gestures, signs and the like. 6 The expression Connotes also publi- 
cation and thus the freedom of the press is included in this category. Free 
propagation of ideas is the necessary objective and this may be done on 
the platform or through the press. The freedom of propagation of ideas 
is secured by freedom of circulation. Liberty of circulation is an essential 
to that freedom as the liberty of publication. Indeed, without circulation the 
publication would be of little value.® < • 

The ‘freedom of speech and expression’ includes the liberty to propagate 
not one’s own views only. It also includes the right to propagate or publish 
the views of other people, 7 otherwise this freedom would not include the free- 
dom of the press. 

Territorial Extent or fundamental freedom.— There are no geographical 
limitations to freedom of speech and expression, guaranteed under Art. 19 (1) 


t. Tata Eogioccimg Co. v. State of Bihar, AIR 1965 SC 40. 

2. AIR 1970 SC 40. 

3. AIR 1973 SC 106- 

4. AIR 1950 SC 124. 

5. Lowell v. C riffin , (1938) 303 US. 444. 

6. Romesh Thappet v. State of Madras, AIR 1950 SC 124. 

7. Srimvasv State of Madras, AIR 1931 Ma l 70. 



9 ] 


HIOIIT TO FREEDOM 


105 


(a), and this freedom is exercisable not only in India but outside and if State 
action sets up barriers to its citizens freedom of expression in any country 
in the world, it, .would violate Art. 19 (i)(a)as much as if it inhibited such 
expression within the country. In Mmeka Gandhi v. Union of India * the Union 
of India contended that the fundamental rights guaranteed by the Consti- 
tution were available only within the territory or India. How could the 
fundamental rights be intented to be operative outside the territory of India 
when their exercise in foreign territory could not be protected by the State ? 
The Supreme Court rejected these contentions and held that the right to free- 
dom of speech and expression has no geographical limitations. Freedom 
of speech and expression carries with it the right to gather information as 
also to speak and express one self at home and abroad and to exchange 
thoughts and ideas with others not only in India but also outside. 


Freedom of the press.— The fundamental right of the freedom of the 
press implicit in the right of the freedom of speech and expression, is essen- 
tial to political liberty and proper functioning of democracy. The American 
Press Commission has said, "Freedom of the press is essential to political 
liberty. When men cannot freely convey their thoughts to one another, no 
freedom is secured, where freedom of expression exists the beginning of a 
free society and a means for every retention of liberty are already present. 
Frec-cxpression is therefore, unique among liberties.” The Indian Press 
Commission has also expressed a similar view. It says that "Democracy can 
thrive not only under the vigilant eye of its legislature, but also under the 
care and guidance of public opinion and the press is par excellence, the vehicle 
through which opinion can become articulate.” Unlike the American Constitu- 
tion Article 19 (l) (a) of the Indian Constitution does not expressly mention 
the liberty of the press but it has been held that liberty of the press is includ- 
ed in the freedom of speech and expression * The "press has no special rights 
wibch arc not to be given or which are not to be exercised by the citizen in 
his individual capacity. The editor of a press or the manager are merely exer- 
cising the right of the expression, and therefore, no special mention is necessary 
of the freedom of the press”. 1 2 3 * 


"The liberty of the press” as defined by Lord Mansfield "consists in 
printing without any licence subject to the consequences of law”. Thus (he 
liberty of the press means liberty to print and publish what one pleases, without 
previous permission. The freedom of the press is not confined to newspapers 
and periodicals. It includes also pamphlets and circulars and every sort of 
publication which affords a vehicle of information and opinion. 

Pre-Censorship Inrnlid.-Tle imposition of censorship on a joornal pre- 
vious to its publication would amount to nn infringement of Article 19 (I) 
(a). The question of validity of censotsbip came up for consideration in the 
case of ft ® Bhlam v Store of Delhi.” In that case the Chief Commissioner of 
Del hfhfcSESU of! SSS. 7 of tbu Fas. FnniabPnb'icSare.yAc. 919 

issued an order against the printer, publisher, editor of an English Weekly 
of Delhi, called the Organiser dicing Sahe^'Smwf and 

iSnding photographs and cartoons other than those 


1. AIR 1978 SC 597. aid tosn 179 

2. Brij Bhusao v. Stale of Delhi. AIR I9S0 SC 129 

I' E,wd“ ta Gnffm. S 093« , Vui- <«« ° f ^ 

5 . IMOSC !??;’ mSSSS lie State, AIR MSI Ajmer 100. 


Canst. — 14 



106 


CONSTnimONAl. LAW Of INDIA 


[Chap. 


derived from official sources or supplied by the news agencies. The Court 
struck down the order, observing : . —the imposition of pre-Ccnsorship of a 

journal is a restriction on the liberty of the press which is an essential part of 
the freedom of the speech and expression declared by Article 19 (1) (a).” 
Similarly, prohibiting newspaper from publication of its own views or the 
views of correspondents about the burning topic of the day is a serious 
encroachment on the valuable right of freedom of speech and expression.* 

In an American case The Sew York Time i Case, 1 2 3 4 two leading American 
newspapers had published some secrets about certain Government documents 
containing informations about America's involvement in the Vietnam War, 
which were alleged to have been stolen from President’s Office. The Government 
requested the court to restrain them from publishing these documents on the 
ground that their publication was likely to endanger the security of the 
country. The newspaper owners contended that these documents contain such 
facts as to how the country got involved in the Vietnam War and how it had 
to suffer a great loss of men, material and prestige. They claimed that the 
publication was in the interest of public and the Government has no legal right 
to impose pre-Ccnsorship under the Constitution. The Court, by a 6 to 3 
majority, held that the pre-Censorship is unconstitutional, for, the Government 
had failed to prove that the publication of these documents threatened the 
security of the country. 

In Express Newspapers v. Union of India, 2 the Supreme Court held that 
a law which imposes pre-ccnsorship or curtails the circulation or prevents news- 
papers from being started or requires the Government to seek Government aid 
in order to survive is violative of Article 19(1) (a). In this case the validity 
of the Working Journalists Act, 1955, was challenged. Tbe Act was enacted 
to regulate conditions of service of persons employed in newspaper industry, 
e. g., payment of gratuity, hours of work, leave, fixation of wages, etc. It was 
contended that the Act would adversely affect the financial position of news- 
paper which might be forced to close down and would curtail circulation and 
thereby narrow the scope for dissemination of information and hence violative 
of Ait. 19 (1) (a). The Court held the Act valid. It said that press is not 
immune from laws of general application or ordinary forms of taxation, or laws 
of industrial relations. The Act was passed to ameliorate the service conditions 
of workmen in the newspaper industry and therefore, imposes reasonable 
restriction on the right guaranteed by Art. 19 (I) (a). 

I n Romesh Thapper v. Stole of Madras,* a law-banning entry and circula- 
tion of journal in a State was held to be invalid. The petitioner was a printer, 
publisher and editor of a weekly journal in English called ‘Cross Road" 
printed and published in Bombay. The Government of Madras, in exercise of 
their powers under section 9 (1-A) of the Maintenance of Public Order Act, 
1949, issued an order prohibiting the entry into or the circulation of the journal 
in that State. The court said that there can be no doubt that freedom of speech 
and expression includes freedom of propagation of ideas, and that freedom 
is ensured fly the freedom of circnfation. Liberty of circulation is an essential 
to that freedom as the liberty of publication. Indeed, without circulation the 
publication woutd be of little value. Restrictions on freedom of speech and 

1. Vuendra v. Stale of Punjab, AIR 1957 S. C. 896. 

2. See American Reporter, July 14, 1911. p. 10. 

3. AIR 1958 S. C 578. 

4. AIR 1950 S. C. 124. 



5) BIGHT TO FREEDOM 107 

expression can Only be imposed on grounds mentioned in Article 19(2) 
of the Constitution. A law which , authorises imposition of restrictions on 
grounds of ‘public safety* or the 'maintenance of public order’ falls outside 
the scope of authorised restrictions under clause (2) and therefore void and 
unconstitutional. 1 2 3 

In Sakai Papers Ltd. v. Union of India .* the Daily Newspapers (Price and 
Control) Order, 1960, which fixed a minimum price and number of pages which 
a newspaper was entitled to publish was challenged as unconstitutional by the 
petitioner on the ground that it infringed the liberty of the press. The peti- 
tioners were required to increase the price of their newspaper without increas- 
ing the pages. An increase in price without any increase in number of pages 
would reduce the volume of circulation. On the other hand, any decrease in 
the number of pages would reduce the column, space for news, views or ideas. 
The order, therefore, acted as double-edged knife. It cuts circulation by a 
price rise or publication or dissemination of news, ideas and knowledge by 
restricting column space consequent to decrease in the number of pages. The 
State justified the law as a reasonable restriction on a business activity of 
a newspaper in the interests of the general public. 

The Court struck down the order rejected the State’s argument. It said 
that the right of freedom of speech and expression cannot be taken away with 
the object of placing restrictions on the business activity of a citizen. Freedom 
of speech can only be restricted on the grounds mentioned in clause (2) of 
Article 19. It'cannot, like the freedom to carry on business, be curtailed in 
the interests of the general public. 

In Sennet Colman and Co. v. Union of India , a the validity of the Newsprint 
Control Order which fixed the maximum number of pages (10 pages) which a 
newspaper could publish was challenged as violative of fundamental rights 
guaranteed in Articles 19 (I) (a) and 14 of the Constitution. The Government 
defended the measure of limiting to all papers at 10 pages level on the grounds 
that it would help small newspapers to grow and to prevent a monopolistic 
combination of big newspapers. The Court held that the newsprint policy is 
not reasonable restriction within the ambit of Art. 19 (2). The newsprint 
policy abridges petitioner’s right of the freedom of speech and expression. 
The newspapers arc not allowed, their right of circulation. They are 
not allowed right of page growth. The common ownership units of 
newspapers cannot bring out newspapers or new editions. The news- 
papers operating above 10 pages level (and newspapers operating below 10 
pages) have been tieated equally for assessing the needs and requirements of 
newspapers which are not their equals. Once the quota is fixed and direction 
to use the quota is in accordance with the newsprint policy is made applicable, 
the big newspapers are prevented any increase in page number. Both page 
number and circulation are relevant for calculating the basic quota and 
allowances for increase. In the garb of distribution of newsprint the 
Government has tended to control the growth and circulation of news- 
papers. Freedom of the press is both qualitative and quantitative. Freedom 
lies both in circulation and in content. The newsprint policy which permits 
newspapers to increase circulation by reducing the number of pages, page area 
and periodicity, prohibits them to increase the number of pagas, page area and 

1. Romesh Thappet's case, AIR 1930 S. C. 124. 

2. AIR 1962 S. C. 305. 

3. AIR 1973 S.C. 106. 



108 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


periodicity by reducing circulation. These restrictions restrict the newspapers 
in adjusting their page number and circulation. ' 

The Government also sought to justify the reduction in the page level on 
the ground that the big dailies devote high percentage of space to advertise- 
ments and therefore the cut in pages will not be fell by them if they adjusted 
their advertisement space. The Court held that the fixation of page-limit will 
not only deprive the petitioners of their economic viability but also restrict the 
freedom of expression by compulsive reduction of page level entailing reduction 
of circulation and the area of coverage for news and views. If as a result of 
reduction in pages the newspapers will have to depend on advertisement as their 
main source of income they will be denied dissemination of news and views. 
That will also deprive them of their freedom of speech and expression. On 
the other hand, if as a result of restriction on page limit the newspapers will 
have to sacrifice advertisements and thus weaken the link of financial strength, 
the organisation will crumble. The loss of advertisement may not only entail 
the closing down but also effect the circulation and thereby infringe on freedom 
of speech and expression. In our view, these features were rightly said by the 
petitioners to be not newsprint control but newspapers conlTol in the guiie of 
equitable distribution of newsprint. 

Direct and inevitable ’effect’— Test.—' The direct and inevitable effect of the 
rationing of newsprint were to control newspaper. It was contended on behalf 
of the Government of India that the subject-matter of the newsprint policy was 
to regulate and control the newsprint and not to control newspapers. In other 
words, it was urged that the test to be applied to ascertain whether a law 
violates Art. 19 (1) (a) is to look into the subject-matter of a law and not its 
effect on a particular right. The Supreme Court rejected this contention and 
approved that test whether the “effect” of the impugned law is to abridge a 
fundamental right. The Court held that if the direct effect of the impugned 
law is to abridge a fundamental right, its object or sujbect-mattcr will be 
irrelvant. In the instant case the Court held that although the subject-matter 
of the newsprint policy was different, its direct effect was newspaper control. 

'Although the freedom of the press is implicit in the freedom of speech* 
it does not stand on higher footing than the freedom of speech and expression 
of a citizen. It is subject to same limitations as are imposed by Article 19 (2) 
of the Constitution. Thus in Express Newspaper's case, 1 the Supreme Court 
'upholding the validity of the Working Journalists Act, observed that the press 
was not immune from ordinary forms of taxation for the general support of 
the Government not from the application of general laws relating to industrial 
relation ot laws regulating the payment of wages. 

Advertisements.— An advertisement of 'commercial nature’ is not protected 
under Article 19 (1) (a). Such advertisements have an element of trade and 
commerce. 

In Hamdard Dawakhana v. Union of Indio,' 2 the validity of the Drug and 
Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act, which put restrictions on 
advertisement of drugs in certain cases and prohibited advertisement of drugs 
having magic qualities for curing diseases was challenged on the ground that 
the restriction on advertisement abridged the freedom of speech. The Supreme 
Court held that an advertisement is no doubt a form of speech but every 
advertisement! is not a matter dealing with the freedom of speech and expres- 

1 . AIR 1958 S. C. 578. 

2, AIR I960 S. C. 554, 



9 ] 


RIGHT TO FREtDOH 


109 


sion of ideas. Id the present case the advertisement was held to be dealing 
With commerce or trade and not to propagating ideas. Advertisement of pro- 
hibited drugs would thus not fall within the scope of Article 19 (J) (a). 

Demonstration, Picketing.— Demonstration or picketing are visible mani- 
festation of one’s Ideas and in effect a form of speech and expression. Demons- 
trations or picketiogs arc protected under Article 19 (I) (a) provided they are 
not violent and disorderly. 1 But it has been held that there is no fundamental 
right to resort to strike. ' Right to strike is not included within the ambit of 
freedom of speech. 2 3 

Film Censorship valid.' — K. A. Abbas v. Union of India* is the first case in 
which the question as to whether censorship of films is included in Art. 19 (2) 
of the Constitution came for consideration before the Supreme Court of India. 
The Court held that censorship of films including (pre-censorship) is justified 
under Articles 19 (1) (a) and (2) of the Constitution. Articles 19 (1) (a) and (2) 
contain the guarantee of the right and the restraints that may be put upon that 
right by a law made by Parliament. The petitioner contended that the free- 
dom is absolute and pre-censorship is not permissible under the Constitution. 
It was said that pre-censorship is inconsistent with the rights guaranteed by 
Art. 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution. It is clear from this that some restraint is 
contemplated by clause (?) and in the matter of censorship only two ways 
arc open to Parliament to impose restrictions. One is to lay down in advance 
the standards for the observance of film producers and then to test each film 
produced against those standards by a previous censorship of the film. The 
other is to let the producer observe those standards and make the infraction an 
offence and punish a producer who does not keep within the standards. The 
petitioner claimed that the former offends the guaranteed freedom but reluc- 
tantly conceded the latter. He also reinforces his argument by contending that 
there are other forms of speech and expression besides the film and none of 
them is subject to any prior restraint in the form of pre-censorship and claims 
equality of treatment with such other forms. He contended that there is no 
justification for different treatment. 

The Supreme Court held that the censorship imposed on the making and 
exhibition of films is in the interest of society. If the regulations venture into 
something which goes beyond this legitimate opening to restrictions they can be 
challenged on the ground that a legitimate power is being abused. What the 
Act authorises is within the permissible restriction provided by clause (2) of 
Article 19. 

Grounds of Restrictions. 

Clause (2) of Art. 19 contains the grounds on which restrictions on the 
freedom of speech and expression can be imposed : 

' (a) Security of the State. , ; , 

(b) Friendly Relations with foreign States. 

(c) Public Order. 

(d) Decency or Morality. > 


1. Kwe.bv.ir Singh v. sun of Bita MR IW2 S.C. 1166:0. K Otab v. E. X. 

Joseph, AIR 1963 S. C. 8li . „ . „ D w 

2. O. K. Ghosh v.E. X. Joseph. ATR 1963 S. C. 812. See also Radbey Shy»m v. P. M. 
C , Nagpur, AIR 1963 S. C. 311. 

3. AIR 1971 S.C. 481. 



110 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA [Chap. 


(c) Contempt of Court. 

(f) Defamation. 

(g) Incitement of an offence. 

(h) Sovereignty and integrity of India. 

(a) Security of the State.— Under clause (2) of Art. 19 reasonable 
restrictions can be imposed on freedom of speech aod expression in the interest 
oT security of the Stats. In Romesh Thapper v. Stale pf Madras, 1 the Supreme 
Court had occasion to interpret the meaning of the words “ security of the 
State". The Court said that there arc different grades of offences against 
‘public order'. Every public disorder cannot amount to be regarded as threaten- 
ing the security of the State. The term ‘security ortho State’, refers only to 
serious and aggravated forms of public disorder, e. ?•, rebellion, waging war 
against the Sate, insurrection and not to ordinary breaches of public order 
and public safety as unlawfull assembly, riot, affray. Thus speeches or expres- 
sions on the part of an individual which incite to or encourage the commis- 
sion of violent crimes, such as, murder are matters which would undermine the 
security of the State." 

The words “in the Interests of” before the words ‘security of the State’ 
clearly imply that the actual result of the act is immaterial. Thus acts which 
may indirectly bring about an overthrow of the State would come within the 
expression. 

An incitement to an armed revolution, though infructuous ultimately, is 
enough to attract the term ‘security of the State’. 

(b) Friendly relations with Foreign States.— This ground was added by tbe 
Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951. Tbe object behind the provision 
was to prohibit unrestrained malicious propaganda against a foreign friendly 
State which may jeopardise the maintenance of good relations between India 
and that State. No similar provision it present in any other Constitution of 
the world. But the laws of each country have adequate provisions to safeguard 
peaceful relations with foreign States. 

In rndia, the Foregin Relations Act, (XII of 1932) provides punishment for 
libel by Indian citizens against foreign dignitaries. Again, the Foreign Recruit- 
ing Ait (IV of 1874) empowers the Executive to prohibit recruitment of any 
citizen of India to the army of foreign States. 

But the interests of friendly relations with foreign States, would not justify 
the suppression of fair criticism of foreign policy of the Government. 

It is to be noted that members of the Commonwealth including Pakistan 
is not a “foreign State" for the purposes of this Constitution. The result is 
that freedom of speech and expression cannot be restricted on the ground that 
the matter is adverse to Pakistan. 

(c) Public Order.— This ground was added by the Constitution (First 
Amendment) Act, 1951, in order to meet the situation arising from the Supreme 
Court's decision in Romesh Thapper's case? In that case it was held that 
ordinary or local breaches of public order were no grounds for restriction 
on the freedom of speech, expression guaranteed by the Constitution. la 


t. AIR 1950 SC 124. 

2. Stale of Bihar v.Shailbala Devi, AIR 1952 SC 329. 

3. AIR 1950 SC 124. 



9 ] 


RIGHT TO FREEDOM 


111 


Romesh Thapper's case, the ' Supreme Court bad Said that ‘public order’ is an 
expression of Vide connotation and signiBes ‘that state of tranquillity which 
prevails amoDg the members of a political society as result of internal regula- 
tions enforced by the Government which they have established. In that case 
the Supreme Court struck down a law banning the entry of a journal in the 
State of Madras in the interest of ‘public order’ because Art. 19 (2) did not 
contain the expression ‘public order’. It was held that restrictions could only 
be imposed on the grounds mentioned in Art. 19 (2). As a result of this deci- 
sion the expression ‘public order' was added to Art. 19 (2) as one of the 
grounds for imposing restrictions on the freedom of speech and expression. 

Public order is what the French call order publique and is something 
more than ordinary maintenance of law and order. ‘Public order’ is synony- 
mous with public peace, safety and tranquillity. The test for determining 
whether an act affects law and order or public order is to see whether the act 
leads to the disturbances of the current of life of the community so as to 
amount to a disturbance of the public order or whether it affects merely an 
individual living the tranquillity of the society undisturbed. 1 

In Kishori Mohan v. State of If'. B. z the Supreme Court explained the 
differences between the three concepts : law and order, public order, security of 
State. The difference between these concepts, the court said, can be explained 
by three fictional concentric circles, the largest representing law and order the 
next public order, and the smallest the security of the State. Every infraction 
of law must necessarily effect order but not necessarily public order and an act 
may effect public order but not necessarily security of the State and an act can 
fall under two concepts at the same time affecting public order and security of 
the State. 

One act may affect individual in which case it would affect law and order 
while another act though of a similar kind may have such an impact that it 
would disturb even the tempo of the life of the community in which case it 
would be said to affect public order, the test being not the kind but the poten- 
tiality of tbc act in question. 

Anything that disturbs public tranquillity or public peace disturbs public 
order.* Thus communal disturbances' 1 and strikes promoted with the sole object 
of causing unrest among workmen* are offences against public order. 

Public order thus implies absence of violence and an orderly state of 
affairs in which citizens can peacefully pursue their normal advocation of 
life. 0 

Public order also includes public safety.* Public safety means the safety 
of the community from the external and internal dangers. Thus creating inter- 
nal disorder or rebellion would affect public order and public safely. But 
mere criticism of Government does not necessarily disturb public order.* In 


Kaau Biswas v. Slate of W. B., AIR 1972 SC 1656- 

AIR 1972 SC >719 ; Dr- Ram NWnohar Lohia v. Stale of Bihar. AIR 1966 SC 740. 
Om Prakash v. Emperor, AIR 1948 Nag. 199. 

Noor Mohammad v. Res, AIR 1949 All. 120. 

Om Prakash v. Emperor. AIR 1948 Nag. 199. 


Basudev y. Rea, AIR 1949 All. 513 (F. B-)- 
Romesh Thapprr v. State of Madras, AIR 1950 SC 124. 

Brij Bhusan't case. AIR 1950 SC 129 

Raj Bahadur Good v. Stale of Hyderabad, AIR 1953 tlyd. 277. 



112 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


ils external aspest ‘public safety’ means protection of the country from 
foreign aggression. Under ‘public order’ the State would be entitled to pre- 
vent propaganda for a State at war with India. 1 

The words 'in the interest of public order’ include not only such utter- 
ances as are directly intended to lead to disorder, but also those that have 
the tendency to lead to disorder. Thus a law punishing utterances made with 
deliberate intention to hurt the religious feelings of any class of persons is 
valid because it imposes a restriction on the right to free speech in the interest 
of public order. Since such speech or writing has the tendency to create 
public disorder even if in some cases those activities may not actually lead to 
a breach of peace. 2 3 4 5 6 But there must be reasonable and proper nexus or rela- 
tionship between the restriction and the achievement of public order. In 
Superintendent, Central Prison v. Dr. Ram Manahar Lohia ,* section 3 of U. P. 
Special Powers Act, 1932 which punished a person if he incited a single 
person not to pay or defer the payment of Government dues was held to be 
invalid because there was no proximate nexus between the speech and public 
order. The Court said that fundamental right cannot be controlled on such 
“hypothetical and imaginary considerations". The Court rejected the argu- 
ment that instigation of a single individual not to pay tax would itself 
destroy public order. 

In Sodhi Shamsher v. State of Pepsu,* a vitriolic attack upon the cha- 
racter and integrity of the Chief Justice of a High Court was held to have no 
rational connection with the maintenance of law and order. 

An action in advance to maintain public order is not prohibited. In 
Babulal Parate v. State of Madras ,* section 144 of the Cr. P. C. was challenged 
on the ground that it imposed unreasonable restriction on the right of freedom 
of speech and expression. The Court upheld the section, h.lding that anti- 
cipatory action to prevent disorder is within the ambit of clause (2) of Article 
19. Under section 144, Cr. P. C., if a magistrate is of the opinion that there 
is sufficient ground for immediate danger of breach of peace can by a written 
order direct a person or persons to abstain from certain acts if he considers 
that such direction is likely to prevent or tend to prevent a disturbance of 
public tranquillity, or a riot or affray. 

(d) Decency or Morality.— The words "morality or decency" are words 
of wide meaning. The word ‘obscenity’ of English law is identical with the 
word ‘decency’ under the Indian Constitution. 

The test of obscenity is whether the tendency of matter charged as 
obscene is to deprave and corrupt those whose minds are open to such immo- 
ral influences' and into whose hands a publication of this sort is likely to 
fall. Thus a publication is obscene if it tends to produce lascivious thoughts 
and arouse lustful desire in the minds of substantial numbers of that public 
into whose hands the book is likely to fall. This test was laid down in an 
English case of R. v. Hieklm. a 

1. Re*, v. Amir Hussain. AIR 1949 F. C. 152. 

2. Ramiilal Modi v. State of U. P., AIR 1957 SC 620 ; see also Ramiilal Modi v 
State ofU.P., AIR 1959 SC 620. 

3. AIR 1960 SC 633. 

4. AIR 1954 SC 276. 

5. AIR 1961 SC 884. 

6. L. R. 3 Q. B. 360 (The test laid down in this ca f c has beeo followed io number of 
eases in India) Ranjit D. Udeshi v. Slate of Maharashtra, AIR 1965 SC 881. 



9] 


KtGUT TO FREEDOM 


113 


S t ‘P s , 292 to 294 of *J e ^d'an Penal Code provide instances of restric- 
tions on the freedom of speech and expression in the interest of decency and 
morality. These sections prohibit the sale or distribution or exhibition of 
obscene matter or doing of obscene acts or singing of obscene songs or uttering 
obscene words, ete., in public places. But the Indian Penal Code does not lav 
down any test to determine obscenity. In Ranjit D. Udeshi v. State of Maha- 
rashtra the Supreme Court accepted the above test to judge the obscenity 
of a matter. In this case the Court upheld the conviction of the appellant a 
book-seller, who was prosecuted under section 292, I. P. C. for selling and 
keeping the book. “The Lady Chatterley’s Lover”. Applying the above test 
the Court held the novel as obscene. ’ 


It is submitted that the Court has erred in not rejecting Hicklin Rale 
which has became obsolete. It lays down a vague and arbitrary standard for 
judging obscenity and has a tendency to curtail the guaranteed right to 
freedom ol speech. 2 No fixed standard can be laid down as to what is moral 
and indescent. The standard of morality varies from time to time and from 
place to place. Birth control which was once considered immoral is now con- 
sidered proper as a means to check over-population. On these considerations, 
we may submit that the court should revise its opinion as soon as it gets an 
opportunity to do so and reject the rule laid nearly hundred years ago by an 
English Judge. 

(e) Contempt of Court. — Restriction on the freedom of speech and ex- 
pression can be imposed if it exceeds the reasonable and fair limit and amounts 
to contempt of Court. 

The Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, now defines the expression ‘Contempt 
of Court’ . as follows : According to section 2 ‘Contempt of Court’ may be 
either ‘civil contempt’ or ‘criminal contempt*. 

(a) ‘Civil contempt’ means wilful disobedience to any judgment, decree, 
direction, order, writ or other process of a court or wilful breach of an 
under-taking given to a court. 

lb) ‘Criminal contempt’ means the publication (whether by words spoken 
or written, or by signs or by visible representations or otherwise) or any 
matter or the doing of any other act whatsoever which — 

(i) scandalises or tends to scandalise, or lowers or lends to lower 
the authority of any court ; or 

(ii) prejudices, or intereferes or tends to interfere with the due course 
of any judicial proceedings ; or 

(iii) interferes or tends to interfere with, or obstructs or tends to obs- 
truct, the administration of justice in any other manner. 

The following acts are however not Contempt of Courts : 

(a) Innocent publication and distribution of any matter ; 

(b) Publication of fair and accurate report of judicial proceedings ; 

(c) Fair criticism of judicial act ; 

(d) Complaint against Presiding Officers made in good faith ; 


'• AIR 1963 SC 881 

Dr. V N. Shukla — The Constitution of India, 1969 edition, p 

Const.— 15 



114 


CONSUtUllONAl LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


(c) Publication of fair information relating to proceedings in chambers or 
in camera ; 

Under the Act, the Contempt of Courts is punishable with simple imprisonment 
for a terra of 6 months, or with fine which may extend to R$. 2,000, or with 
both. 


A judge, magistrate or any person acting judicially shall nlso be liable 
for contempt of his court in the S3me manner as any other individual is liable 
under this Act. 

Thus judges have no general immunity from criticism of their judicial 
conduct provided it is made in good faith and is a fair criticism of his judicial 
act. 


The terminology used in the definition is borrowed from the English law 

of contempt and embodies concepts which are familiar to that law which by 

and large, was applied in India. The expressions “scandalise” ‘'lowering the 
authority of the court", ’’interference”, "obstruction” and “administration of 

justice" arc therefore to be understood by our courts with the aid of English 

law. 


In Baradakanl v. Registrar, Orissa,' the appellant, a senior Judicial Officer, 
was convicted and sentenced unJer the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 by a 

io5S ch Hi ® hCour . t * Tbe facts of the case were that on March 

28, 1972, a disciplinary proceeding was started against him and he was placed 

under suspension. On receiving the suspension order the appellant wrote three 
r* fu S ' *" c H'gh Court and one to the Government. It is the contents 

. th L e , pr i s 5 D ‘ C0Dtem P l proceedings were launched 
against him and he was punished. The Supreme Court held that contemplations 
3 “’ * ,th "ference to the administrative functions of High Court 
w?th thV rnnrt nr \ ? emp i*. Administration of justice is closely associated 
hl ',= <o Inform multifarious functions for 
in raCS! .! °, r , . Any lapse from Iht slricl standards or rectitude 

Jn“3 '““'"‘’"V 1 kornd to rirre. adminislralion or juslice. Tbe 
esereisedVii J a- 11 (° r ,hc P ur POse of juslice and the conirol 
u w! aS ?“ M , 15 •>» tkt object of maintaining the 

vSat ataf , h i'IT ror the superior Coon to be 

- . 1 .a ^ duct and behaviour orthesubordiaateJudce as a Judge 
?l.*S ,U‘ W i Adjudication of eases between parte s no. the 
to toTone, S ?E , I ? l « i P | i“'y oontrol is a function as eoa- 

iutl S 'beKem “ ,a y'»e down the law or doing 

justice Between the parties. Thus when the High Court under Art 235 

justiw?* m dlsc,plinary ca P acit y il d °« SO in furtherance of administration of 

judge Men in 1 ourel^ t admtTdtt™i- ,0ry of » Judge funcliouing as a 

criminal contemn/ The or , non -adjudicatory matters amounts to 

grossly vilified the High Court 'L"*? lh V above-mentioned letters have 

administration of instil nd^hi r d ? as substantially interfered with I be 
the offence of criminl Uon/mpt.^ 0 " ^ appe,,ant was ri « ht >y convicted of 

to defemation IDal Defflmaffon t r meD - t » V ^’ C * 1 ’ n ^ ures a man ’ s reputation amounts 
oeiamation. Defamat.on consists in exposing a man to hatred, ridicule, or 

1 AIR 1974 SC 710 ; also see G. II. Yerma 


v. Hargovind Dayal, AIR 1975 All. 52* 



9) RIGHT TO FRFPDOSf U5 

contempt. In India, section 499 of the Indian Penal Code, contains the crimi- 
nal law relating to defamation. It recognises no distinction between the 
defamatory statement addressed to the ear or eye, /. e., slander and libel. These 
sections are saved as being reasonable restrictions on the freedom of speech 
and expression. 1 The civil law relating to defamation is still uncodified in India 
and subject to certain exceptions follows genarally the English law. 

(g) Incitement to an offence.— This ground was also added by the Consti- 
tution (First Amendment) Act, 1951. Obviously, freedom of speech and expres- 
sion cannot confer a licence to incite people to commit offence. The word 
‘offence’ used here is not defined in the Constitution. It is, however, defined in 
the General Clauses Act, as meaning “Offence shall mean any act or omission 
made punishable by any law for the time being in force”. What constitutes 
‘incitement’ will, however, have to be determined by the court with reference to 
the facts and circumstances of each case. 

(h) Integrity and Sovereignty of India.— The ground was added to clause 
(2) of Article 19 by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963. Under 
this clause freedom of speech and expression can be restricted so as not to 
permit any one to challenge the integrity or sovereignty of India or to preach 
cession of any part of India from the Union. 

Sedition.— As understood in English law, sedition embraces all those 
practices whether by word, or writing which are calculated to distrub the 
tranquillity of the State and lead ignorant persons to subvert the Government. 2 3 * 
Thus the gist to the offence of sedition is incitement to violence. Mere criticism 
of the Government is no offence. 

'In India, section 124-A of the Indian Penal Code, defines the offence of 
sedition as follows : 

“Whoever by words either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible 
representation or otherwise brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt 
or excites or attempts to excite disaffection towards the Government established 
by law in India shall be punished.” 

Explanation 3 to section 124-A states that more comment expressing dis- 
appropriation of Government is no offence if it does not excite or attempt to 
excite ‘disaffection towards Government established by law’. 

In Niharendu v. Emperor, 9 the Federal Court had held that mere criticism 
or even redicule of the Government is uo offence unless it is calculated to 
undermine respect for the Government in such a way as to make people cease 

to obey it and obey the law, so that only anarchy can follow Public disorder 

is the gist of the offence. But the Privy Council overruled this decision and held 
that the offence of sedition is not confined to only incitement to violence or 
disorder. 

It is to be noted that sedition is not mentioned in clause (2) of Article 19 
as one of the grounds on which restriction on freedom of speech and expres- 
sion may be imposed. But it has been held In Deri Soren v. State, that sections 
124-A and 153-A of I. P. C. impose reasonable restriction in the interest of 
public order and is saved by Article 19 (2j. 

1. Dr. Sutesh Chandra v. Pandit Goala, AIR 1951 Cal, 176. 

2] R. N. Sul liven, (1 868) 1 1 Cox Cases 55. 

3. AIR 1942 FC 22. 

A. AIR 1954 Pat. 254, 



CONSTITtniONAI. LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


116 


In Kedar Nath v. State of Bihar, 1 the constitutional validity of section 
1 24- A, I. P. C., was considered by the Supreme Court. The Court upheld the 
view taken by the Federal Court in Niharertdu’s case, 2 that the gist of the 
offence of sedition is that the words written or spoken have tendency or 
intention of creating public disorder and held the section constitutionally 
valid. 


B- FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY— Ait. 19 (1) (b) & 19 (3) 


Article 19(1) (b) guarantees to all citizens of India right “to assemble 
peaceably and without arms”. The right of assembly includes the right to 
hold meetings and to take out processions. This right is, however, subject to 
the following restrictions : 

1. The assembly must be peaceable; 

2. It must be unarmed ; 


3. Reasonable restrictions can be imposed under clause 3 of Article 19. 

The right of assembly is implied in the very idea of the democratic 
Government. The right of assembly thus includes right to hold meetings and 
to take out processions. This right, like other individual rights, is not 
absolute but restrictive. The assembly must be Don-violent and must not cause 
aoy breach of public peace. If the assembly is disorderly or riotious then it 
is not protected under Article 19 (!)(b) and reasonable restrictions may be 
imposed under clause (3) of Article 19 in the interests of ‘sovereignty and 
integrity of India’ or ‘public order*. 

When a lawful Assembly becomes unlawful. — Article 19 (1) (b) saves exist- 
ing Indian law regulating public meetings in the interest of public order if 
the restrictions are reasonable. If an assembly becomes unlawful it 
can be dispersed. Chapter VIII of the Indian Penal Code lays down the 
conditions when an assembly becomes ‘'unlawful”. Under section 141 of 
the Indian Penal Code, an assembly of five or more persons becomes an 
unlawful assembly if the common object of the persons composing the 
assemly is— 


(a) to resist the execution of any law or legal process, 

(b) to commit any mischief or criminal trespass, 

(c) obtaining possession of any property by force, 

(d) to compel a person to do what he is not legally bound to do or to 
omit which he is legally entitled to do. 


(el, to overawe the Government by means of criminal force or show 
or criminal force or any public servant in the exercise of his lawful 
powers. 


An assembly which was not unlawful when assembled may subsequently 
“^lawful, X f It becomes violent or is likely to result in disturbance. 
Under section 129 of the Criminal Procedure Code. 1973 such an assembly 
may be ordered to be dispersed if the disturbance to the public peace is 
reasonably apprehended. Section 151 of the Indian Penal Code makes it 


1. AIR 1952 SC 955. 

2. AIR 1942 F.C. 22. 



9} 


RIGHT TO FREEDOM 


1 17 


an offence not to disperse after a lawful command to disperse has been 
given. 

Section 107 of the Criminal Procedure Code empowers a Magistrate to 
obtain security for keeping the peace from any person who is likely to commit 
a breach of peace. 

Section 144, Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 empowers the Magistrate to 
restrain an assembly, meeting or procession if there is a risk of obstruction 
annoyance or injury to any person lawfully employed or danger to human life’ 
health or safety or a distuibancc of the public tranquillity or a riot or an 
afTray. The Police Act, 1861, empowers a police officer to direct the conduct 
and prescribe the route and time or all assemblies and processions 
in the interest of public order. Under section 30 of this Act a prior licence 
has to be taken by a member of the public to take out a procession. A law 
conferring authority on the Magistrate to grant or refuse a licence to 
hold a meeting or a law imposing a restriction that no public procession 
could be taken out without a licence from a Magistrate has been held to 
be valid. 1 * 

Uulike the American Constitution, which guarantees to the people the 
right to keep and bear arms, the Indian Constitution does not guarantee any 
general right to carry arms to any assembly, lawful. However, the existing 
Aims Act prohibits possession and carrying of unlicensed offensive weapons. 
The Prevention of Seditious Meeting Act, 1911 prohibits public meeting likely 
to promote sedition or to cause a disturbance of public tranquillity, it 
empowers the State Government to declare the whole or any part of the State 
to be a 'proclaimed area’. Thereupon, no public meeting for the furtherance 
or discussion of any subject likely to cause disturbance or for the excitement, 
or for the exhibition or distribution of any writing or printed matter relating 
to any such subject, shall be held in any such proclaimed area, (a) unless 
written DOtice of the intention to hold such meeting and of the time and 
place of such meeting has been given to the District Magistrate or the Com- 
missioner of Police, as the case may be, at least three days previously, (b) 
unless permission to hold such meeting has been obtained in writing from the 
above Officers as the case may be. 

AH the above mentioned statutory provisions impose reasonable 
restrictions under clause (3) of Article 19 on the right to freedom of 
assembly. 

C. FREEDOM TO FORM ASSOCIATION— Art. 19 (1) (c) & 19 (4) 

Article 19 (1) (c) of the Constitution of India guarantees to all its citizens 
the right "to form associations and unions’* under clause (4) of Article 19, 
however the State may by law impose reasonable restrictions on this right in 
the interest of public order or morality or the sovereignty and integrity of 
India. 

The right of association pre-supposes organisation. It is an organisation 
of permanent relationship between its members in matters of common concern. 

It thus includes the right to form companies, societies, partnership, trade 
unions 3 and political parties. 

1 Dasappa v Dy. Additional Commissioner. AIR 1960 N'ys. 57 : Brahmanand v. Stale 

of Bihar. AIR 1959 Pat. 425. 

2. Kulkami v. State of Bombay, AIR 1931 Bom. 105. 



118 CONSTITOTltWAl LAW OF INDIA (Chap. 

The right guaranteed is not merely the right to ‘form’ association but 
also to continue with the association as such. The freedom to form associa- 
tion implies also the freedom to form or not to form, to join or not to join, 1 
an association or union. 

In Damayanti v. Union of India? the validity of Hindi Sahitya Satnraelaa 
Act, 1962 was challenged as violative of Art. 19 (l ) (c). The petitioner was a 
member of an association. The Act changed the composition of the associa- 
tion and introduced new members. The result of this alteration was that the 
members who voluntarily formed the association were now compelled to act in 
that association with other members in whose administration they had no say. 

The Supreme Court held that the Act violates the rights of the original 
members of society to form an association guaranteed under Article 19 (1) (c) 
“The right to form an association " the court said “necessarily implies that the 
persons forming the association have also the right to continue to be associated 
with only those whom they voluntarily admit in the association. Any law by 
which members are introduced in the voluntary association without any option 
being given to the members to keep them out, or any law which takes away 
the membership of those who have voluntarily joined it. will be a law violating 
the right to form an association”. The Hindi Sahitya Sammelan Act does not 
merely regulate the administration of the affair* of the original society, what it 
docs is to alter the composition of the society itself. The result of this change 
in the composition is that the members who voluntarily formed the association 
are now compelled to act in that association with other members who have 
been imposed as members by the Act and in whose admission to membership 
they bad no say. Such alteration in the composition of the association itself 
clearly interferes with the right to continue to function as roembres of the 
association which was voluntarily formed by the original founders. The Act, 
therefore, violates the right of the original members of society to form an 
association guaranteed under Article 19 (1) (c). 

As regards the plea that the Act imposes reasonable restriction under 
clause (4) of Art. 19, the court said that clause (4) cannot be called in to 
claim validity for the Act. Under Clause (4) of Article 19 reasonable restrictions 
can be imposed only in the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India 
or in the interests of public order or moralit). The alteration of the constitu- 
tion of the society in manner laid down by the Act is not in the interests of the 
sovereignty and integrity of India or in the interests of public order or morality. 

Right of Association and Armed Forces. — In O. K. A. Nair j. Union of 
India? an important question arose whether 'civilian* employees, designated as 
‘non combatants* such as cooks, chowkidars, laskers, barbers, mechanics, boot 
makers, tailors, etc. attached to the Defence Establishments have a right to 
form associations or unions. The appellants were members of the civil 
employees unions in the various centres of the Defence Establishment. The 
Commandant declared their unions as unlawful associations. They challenged 
that the impugned action was violative of their fundamental right to form 
associations or unions uader Art. 19 (IJ (c) of the Constitution. They contended 
that the members of the unions, though attached to the Defence Establishments, 
are civilians and their service conditions are regulated by Civil Service 

I. Surya Pal Singh v. State of U. P., AtR 1951 All 674 ; V. G. Row v. State of Madras. 

AIR 1951 Mad 147. 

J. AIR 1971 S. C. 966- 

J. AIR 1976 S C.t 179, 



9] 


RIO HI TO FREEDOM 


119 


Rules and therefore they could not be called “members of the Armed Forces” 
within the meaning of Art. 33 of the Constitution. The Supreme Court 
however, rejected the arguments of the appellants and held that the civilian 
employees of the Defence Establishments answer the description of the members 
of the Armed Forces within the meaning of Art. 33 and therefore are not 
entitled to form trade unions. It is their duty to follow or accompany the 
Armed Personnel on active service, or in camp or on march. Although 
they are non-combatants and in some matters governed by the Civil Service 
Rules, yet they are integral to Armed Forces. Consequently, under the Army 
Act the Central Government was competent to make rules restrictin'* or 
curtailing their fundamental right under Art. 19 (1) (c). 

Restrictions on the Freedom of Association.— The right of association, like 
other individual freedom, is not unrestricted. Clause (4) of Article 19 empo- 
wers the State to impose reasonable restrictions on the right of freedom of 
association and union in the interest of “public order" or “morality” or 
“sovereignty or integrity of India.” 1 2 It saves existing laws in so far as they are 
not inconsistent with fundamental rights of association. 

The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908, as amended by the Madras 
Act, 1950, provides that if the State Government is of opinon that any 
association interferes with the administration of law or with the maintenance 
of law and order or that it constitutes a danger to the public peace it may by 
notification in the official Gazette declare such association to be unlawful. 
Such a notification was to be placed before an Advisory Board. Representa- 
tion against such a notification could be made. If the Advisory Board was of 
opinion that the association was not unlawful the Government was to cancel 
the notification. 

The validity of the above Act was challenged in the case of State of 
Madras v. V. G, Roy.* The Supreme Court held that the restrictions imposed 
by section 16 (2) (b) of the Act as unreasonable. The test under it was 
subjective satisfaction of the Government and the factual existence of the 
grounds was not a justiciable issue. Therefore, the vesting of power in the 
Government to impose restrictions in this right without allowing the grounds 
tested in a judicial enquiry was a strong element to be taken into considera- 
tion in judging the reasonableness of the restrictions on the right to form 
association or union. The existence of an advisory board could not be a 
substitute for judicial inquiry. 

In Haji Mohd. v. District Board, Malda, 3 4 5 a restriction requiring a teacher 
to take prior permission to engage in political activities was held to be a 
reasonable restriction. It aimed at preventing teachers from getting mixed up 
with political institutions. For, a teacher is not merely a citizen but he has 
to be under certain terms and discipline of employment. 

But a Government order requiring municipal teachers not to join unions 
other than those officially approved was held to impose prior restraint 
on the right to form association and union, which was in the nature of 
administrative censorship, and hence invalid.* In G. K. Ghose v. E. X. Joseph ,* 

1. This ground was added to clause (4) of Article 19 by the Constitution (16th Amend- 
ment) Act, 1963. 

2. AIR 1952 S. C. 196. ^ „ , , 

3. AIR 1938 Cal 401 . See also Hanumaothappa v. Special Officer, Distt. Board, AIR 

1960 A.P. 342. 

4. Ramknshna v. President, District Board, Nell ore, AIR 1952 Mad. 253. 

5. AIR 1963 S.C. 812 



120 


commurioNAL law op inoia 


[Chap. 


Rule 4-B of the Central Civil Service (Conduct) Rules, 1955, which required a 
Government servant not to join or contioue to be a member of the Association 
of Government servants as soon as recognition given lo such association is 
withdrawn or if after the association is formed, no recognition is granted to 
it within six months. In other word*, the right to form an association was 
conditioned as the existence of recognition of' the said association by the 
Government. The Court said that the condition of recognition made the 
right under Art. 19 (l){c) ineffective or illusory. If the association obtains 
the recognition and continues to enjoy it. Government servants can become 
members of the said association, if the association does not secure recognition 
from the Government or recognition granted to it is withdrawn, the Govern- 
ment servants must cease to be the members of the said association. Under 
Ait. 19 (4) reasonable restrictions can be imposed on the right in the interest 
of public order, but in tbc instant case, restrictions were not reasonable as 
the recognition could be refused on grounds which had no connection with 
the public order. 

In Balakotiah v. Union of India,* the services of the appellant were 
terminated under Railway Service Rules for his being a member of Com- 
munist Party and a trade unionist. The appellant contended that the termina- 
tion from service amounted in substance to a denial to him the right to form 
association. The appellant had no doubt a fundamental right to form 
association but he had no fundamental right to be continued in the Govern- 
ment service. It was, therefore, held that the order terminating his services 
was not in contravention of Article 19 (1) (c) because the order did not 
prevent the appellant from continuing to be in Communist Party or trade 
unionist. 

The right to form union does not carry with it the right to achieve every 
object. Thus the trade unions have no guaranteed right to an effective 
bargaining or right to strike or a right to declare a lock-out.* 

D. FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT— Art. 19 (1) (A) and 19 (5) 

Article 19 (1) (d) guarantees to all citizens of India the right “to move 
freely throughout the territory of India”. This right is, however, subject to 
reasonable restrictions mentioned in clause (5) of Art. 19, i. e., in the interest 
of general public or (2) for the protection of the interest of any Scheduled 
Tribe. 

Article 19 (1) (d) of the Constitution guarantees to its citizens a right to 
go wherever they like in Indian territory without any kind of restriction what- 
soever. They can move not merely from one Slate to another but from one 
place to another within the same State. This freedom cannot be curtailed 
by any law except within the limits prescribed under Article 19 (5). What the 
Constitution lays stress upon is that the entire territory is one unit so far the 
citizens are concerned.® Thus the object was to make Indian citizens national 
minded and not to be petty and parochial. 

Gronnds of Restrictions.— The State may under clause (5) of Article 19 

j. AIR 1958 SC 232. 

5 AH India Bank Employees Association v. The National ladostriat Tribunal, AIR 1952 
’ SC 171 ; Raghubar Dayal v. Union of India, AIR 1952 SC 263, 

3 . NB Khare v. State of Delhi, AIR 1950 SC 211. 



9) 


RIGHT TO FREEDOM 


12! 


impose ‘reasonable’ restrictions on the freedom of movement on two 
grounds — 

(1) in the interests of general public, 

(2) for the protection of the interest of any Scheduled Tribe. 

In N. B. Khare v. Stale of Delhi, 1 the petitioner was served with an order 
of externment by the District Magistrate, Delhi, to remove himself immediately 
from Delhi district and not to return there for a period of three months. The 
order was made under the East Punjab Safety Act, 1949. The petitioner con- 
tended that the order imposed unreasonable restrictions on his right to move 
freely, because (a) the externment order depended on the subjective satisfaction 
of the Executive, and (b) the Act did not fix any maximum time beyond which 
the order cannot continue. 


The Supreme Court held that the mere fact that the power to make the 
order of externment was given to the State Government or District Magistrate 
whose satisfaction was final did not make the restriction unreasonable because 
the desirability of passing such an individual order ia emergency has to be left 
to an officer. The second contention was rejected on the ground that the Act 
was of limited duration, therefore, there was no possibility of an order of 
externment being made for indefinite period. But a law providing for externment 
of dangerous character from a particular locality cannot be called reasonable 
if it does not specially define as to what is meant by dangerous character 
as it gives the administrative authority arbitrary power to determine as to 
whether a citizen is of dangerous character or not.* 

In State of Uttar Pradesh v. Kaushalya,* the Supreme Court has held that 
the right of movement of prostitutes may be restricted on grounds of public 
health and in the interest of public morals. 

The right of a citizen to move freely may also be restricted for the pro- 
tection of the interest of “Scheduled Tribes". This was to protect the 
orginal tribes which are mostly settled in Assam. These tribes have their own 
culture, language, customs and manners. It was considered necessay to impose 
restriction upon the eDtry of outsider to these areas. It was feared that 
uncontrolled mixing of the tribe with the people of other areas might produce 
undesirable effect upon the tribal people. 

E. FREEDOM OF RESIDENCE-Art. 19 (1) (e) and 19 (5) 


According to Article 19 (l)(e) every citizen of India has the right “to 
reside and settle in any part of the territory of India”. However, under clause 
0 f Article 19 reasonable restrictions may be imposed on this right by law 
in the interests of the general public or for the protection of the interests of 

any Scheduled Tribe. 

The object of the clause is to remove internal barriers within India or 
of its parts. The words ‘the territory of India’ as used in this 
Article indicate freedom to reside anywhere and in any part of the State of 
India. 

It is to be noted that the right to reside, and right to move freely 


1. AIR 1950 SC 211. 

2 State of M. P. v- Baldeo. AIR 1961 SC 293. 

3’. AIR 1961 SC 416 ; see also Kamala China v. Slate. AIR 1963 Punj. 36. 
Const. 16 



122 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA (Chap. 

throughout the country are complementary and often go together. Therefore 
most of the cases considered under Art. 19 (I) (d) arc relevant to Article 19 
(1) (e) also. This right is subject to reasonable restrictions imposed by law in 
the interest of general public or for the protection of the interests of any 
Scheduled Tribe. Thus where a prostitute, under the Suppression of Immoral 
Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956, was ordered to remove herself from the 
limits of a busy city or the restriction was placed on her movement and resi- 
dence it was held to be a reasonable restriction. 1 2 3 

The freedom of movement and residence may be curtailed and suspended 
during an emergency. In the case of a foreigner it can be restricted under 
the Foreigners Acts of 1964 and 1966. A foreigner may be ordered to remove 
himself from India. The impoitant case on this point is Ebrahim Wazir v. 
State of Bombay Section 7 of the Influx from Pakistan (Control) Act, 1949. 
empowered the Central Government to direct the removal from India of any 
person including an Indian citizen who had committed or against whom 
reasonable suspicion existed of having committed an offence under the Act, i.e., 
to enter India without permit or valid passport. The appellant in the above 
case came to India without permit and was arrested and deported to Pakistan 
under the instant Act. The court held the order of removal invalid on the 
ground that it imposed unreasonable restriction upon the fundamental right of 
a citizen to reside and settle in the country. The coming of a citizen to his 
home land even without a permit could not be so grave an offence as to justify 
his expulsion from the country. 

In State of M. P. v. Bharat Singh, 9 section 3 (I) of the M. P. Public Secu- 
rity Act. 1959, empowered the State Government to issue an order requiring a 
person to reside or remain in such a place as may be specified in the order or 
to ask him to leave the place and go to another place selected by authorities, 
in the interests of security of the State or public order. The Supreme Court 
held that section 3 (I) (b) of the Act imposes unreasonable restriction on the 
right guaranteed by Article 19 (1) (b) and therefore, void. The Act did not give 
an opportunity to the person concerned of being heard about the place where 
he was asked to reside. The place selected for him might have no residential 
accommodation and no means of livelihood, etc. The section did not in- 
dicate the extent of the place or area, its distance from the residence of the 
person extemed. 

£F. FREEDOM OF PROFESSION, OCCUPATION, TRADE 
OR BUSINESS— Art. 19 (I) (g) and 19 (6) 

Article 19 (1) (g) guarantees that all citizens shall have the right “to 
practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business”. 
However, the right to carry on a profession, trade or business is not unqualifi- 
ed. H can be restricted and regulated by authority or law. Thus the State can 
under clause (6) of Article 19 make any law — 

(a) imposing r esoaable restriction on this right in the interest of generai 
public. 

_(b) prescribing professional or technical qualification necessary for 
practising any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or business, 

1. Stale of U.P. v. Kaushalya. AIR 19«4 SC 41 6. 

2. AIR 1954 SC 299. 

3. AIR 1967 SC 1170. 



RIGHT TO FREEDOM 


123 


(c) enabling the State to carry on any trade or business to the exclusion 
of citizens wholly or partially. 

The right to carry on a business includes the right to close it at any time 
the owner likes. 1 So, the State cannot compel a citizen and stop him from 
ci 0S i D c his business. But as no right is absolute, the right to close a business is 
also not an absolute right. It can be restricted, regulated or controlled by law in 
the interest of public. The right to close down a business can not be equated or 
nlaced at par as high as the right not to start and carry on business. If one does 
not start a business at all, then, under no circumstances, he can be compelled to 
start one But if one has started or carrying on a business, he has no absolute 
r aht to close it. He can be compelled not to close down his business in the 
‘ t5 0 r general public. These principles have been laid down by the Supreme 
recent case of Excol Wjar Onion of India* In that care 
the netitlontri "Excel Wear” wat a registered firm, It has a factory at Bombay 
iheie it manufactured garments for exports. Due to serious labour trouble, the 
factory was running into a recurring loss. The petitioners finding it almost 
tlShle to carry on business of the factory, served a notice on the State 
Government for previous approval for its closure. The Government refused 
Gov "° 1 in the nublic interest. The Government tefused approval under Secs. 
SS &c *25 R. of the industrial Disputes Act. 1947. See. 25-0. provides for tek- 
■ —rmUtinn for closure. Sec. 25-R, provides punishment for violation of Sec. 
25-0 In the instant case the Court held that Sec. 25-0 of the Act as a whole and 
- r^'tc D in far as it relates to the awarding punishment for violation of the 
movirions of Sec! 25-0 arc unconstitutional and invalid for violation of Art. 19 
M Wot of the Constitution. The Court said that no body has got a tight to 
('> O' lDC . - jf hc cannot pay even the minimum wages to the labour, 
carry on 5' down his business The refusal not to close down business 

^enifh'can not pay, is not a reasonable restriction in the public interest with- 
inTthe meaning*^ Art. 19 (6) of the Consti.utton. 

To orohibit lock-outs and strikes, is however, different os this is within the 
nrohibitorypowers of Government in the interests of the general pubhe. *. g. 
to keep the utility services running.* 

„ ... nractise anv “profession” does not include right to carry on 

■u h .'.!' E m any immoral profession. The Slate has no right to prohibit 
Ses, which »,e illegal or immoral or injurious to the health and welfare of 
the public. 

Grounds of Restrictions 

. , 1 .... nf Article 19 the State is authorised to impose reson- 

Under clause (6) q ^ Qn a trade, profession and business, 

able restrictions °? } h . restrictions must be (1) * resonable ’ and (2) in the 
The condition is that th business being a fundamental 

interest of general public .Jhcngbt 7 h f frictions imposed by law in the 
tight, its J 'public under Article 19 (6). In Nagar Rice and Flour 

interest of the , genen « P« » Government issued an order under section 8 

ffiS, (R^^tion) Act. 1955, sanctioning the 

- . * F N (Pr)Ud^AIR 1961 Madras 331 ; Halhisiog Mfe. 

i ill’ll M C cS;.»i»nx. W-*. . A.R .*> »“•«. 

4. AIR 1971 SC 246. 



124 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


change in the location of the rice mill from its original site to the new site. 
The respondent challenged the order on the ground that appellant’s null was 
moved to a place in the vicinity of 'their* rice mill and in consequence of the 
removal of the appellant’s mill their busiaess was likely to be adversely affected 
and amounts to unreasonable restriction on his right to carry on business. _ The 
Court held the order valid. The owners of the rice mill shifted its existing 
location and obtained the necessary permission for the change of location from 
the Director of Food and Civil Supplies. Even if it be assumed that the previous 
sanction has to be obtained frome the authorities before the machinery is 
moved from its existing site the competitor in business (owner of another rice 
mill) can have no grievance against the grant of permission, pemitting the .in- 
stallation on a new site. The exercise of right under Art. 19 £1) (g) is subject 
only to the restrictions imposed in the interest of ‘general public’ and not that 
it adversely affects other’s business. 

In order to determine the reasonableness of the restriction for the pur- 

E roses of clause (6) of Article 19 regard must be had to the nature of the 
usiness and condition prevailing in the particular trade. U is obvious that 
nature of business must differ from trade to trade and no hard and fast rules 
concerning all trades can be laid down. The facts and circumstances present 
in trade, the type of the evil -attempted to be remedied, the degree of harm 
likely to be caused to the citizens should determine the scope of restrictions to 
be imposed by the State. All the attendant circumstances should enter into 
legislative prescription of reasonableness of a restriction. 1 

There is no fundamental right to do trade or business in intoxicants. 
Thus trade in noxious and dangerous goods, adulterated food, trafficking io 
women may be prohibited altogether by the State in the interest of the general 
public. The trades which are neither immoral nor injurious to the health and 
public welfare cannot be suppressed or prohibited. They can only be 
regulated and tbeir evil effects, if any, be mitigated. Some occupations by 
their very nature of being noisy and dangerous may require regulation to the 
locality in which they should be practised and special conditions in which they 
should be carried on. No citizen has right to carry on his business at place 
of his choice, if bis doing so is injurious to the public health or even causes 
inconvenience toothers. The State has power to enforce an absolute prohibi- 
tion of manufacture for sale of intoxicating liquor. The State has the exclusive 
right or privilege to manufacture, store' and sale of liqour and to grant that 
right to its licence holders on payment of consideration, with such conditions 
and restrictions for its regulation as may be necessary in the public interest. 2 3 

Instances of Reasonable Restriction.— (1) There is no right to carry on 
business at a particular place. The State may impose reasonable restrictions 
in the interest of general, public. Thus a competent authority may reasonably 
fix a place for a bus stand, 8 a cinema house,* or a liquor shop. 4 5 


1. Mineral Development Ltd. v. state of Bihar, A. I. R. 1960 S. C. 468 Nareodra 
Kumar v. Union of India, A. I. R. 1960 S. C. 430 ; Hathisbing Manufacturing 
Company v. Union of India A. I. R. i960 S.C. 921 ; Cooverji v. Excise Commis- 
sioner, A. I. R. 1954 S C. 220 ; Chintamanrao v. State of M. P., A. I. R. 1955 S. C. 


2. Lakhanlal v. State of Orissa, A.I.R. 1977 S. C. 722 ; Nahirwar v. State of M.P., 
A. 1. K. 1*75 5* L joVi 

3. T. Ibrahim v. Regional Transport Authority, A. I. R. 1953 s, C. 79. 

4 Fanchhorialji v. Revenue Divisional Commissioner, A I. R. 1960 Orissa 88. 

5. Cooverji v. Excise Commissioner, A. I. R. 1954 $.C, 220. 



9 ) 


RIGHT TO FREEDOM 


125 


(2) The Minimum Wages Act empowered the Government to fix mini- 
mum wages to be given to the labourers in a particular industry. In Bijay 
Cotton Milk Ltd. v. State of Ajmer,' the Act was challenged as being in viola- 
tion of Article 19 (g). The Court held the restrictions imposed by the Act 
to be reasonable as being imposed in the interest of general public. The 
Court observed : 

“In an under-developed country which faces the problem of unem- 
ployment on a very large scale, it is not unlikely that labour may offer to work 
even on starvation wages. The policy of the Act is to prevent the employ- 
ment of such sweated labour in the interest of general public.” 1 2 

(3) The fixation of miximum prices of commodities essential to the life 
of the community, control oo their production, distribution and setting of 
their stocks are reasonable restrictions on the freedom of trade. The Essential 
Supplies Act, 1946, and the Essential Commodities Act, empowered the 
Government to control production, supply and distribution of essential com- 
modities, the object being to secure equitable distribution, availability at fair 
price and regulation of the transport, distribution and acquisition of essential 
commodities. 3 4 5 * These Acts were held to be valid. 

(4) The Punjab Trade Employees Act, 1949, provided that shops and 
establishments shall remain closed for a d3y in a week. In Monohar Lai v. 
State of Punjab* the Supreme Court held the restriction to be reasonable 
because the purpose of the Act is to improve the health and efficiency of the 
workers who form an essential part of the community and in whose welfare 
the community is vitally interested. The contention of the petitioner that the 
Act did not apply to him because ht did not employ any olher person and 
was conducting the business himself was also rejected by the Court. Similarly, 
if the idea is to improve the condition of working classej and with that end 
in view the State Government imposes a condition that workman will be 
entitled to bonus for the past period, the law can be held valid as imposing 
reasonable restrictions in the interest of general public. 8 

(5) Imposition of licence fee as a requirement for the grant of licence to 
a citizen who wants to carry on a trade or business or profession does not 
amount to an unreasonable restriction. But the condition for granting licence 
must be reasonable and must not give arbitrary power to the licensing autho- 
rity. Thus a fee for obtaining a licence or a permit is not unreasonable. It 
is neither a tax nor unreasonable condition for the grant of licence.* 

(6) Creation of monopoly rights in favour of a few persons is notun- 
reasonable. Thus in Cooverji v. Excise Commissioner , 7 law which created a 
monopoly to sell liquor In favour of a few persons was held valid. The Court 
said that sale of intoxicating liquors cannot be claimed as a right by every 


1. A. I. R. 1955 S. C. 33. 

2. U. Unichoyi v. State of Kerala, A. 1. R. 1962 S. C. 12 at p. 17. 

3. State of Rajasthan v. Nath Mai. A. I. R. 1954 S. C 307; D»arla PJ. v. State of 
U. P., A. l.R. 1954 S. C. 224. 

4. A I. R. 1961 S. C. 418. 

5. State of U. P. v. U3*ti Sugar Mill*. A. I. R. 1961 S. C. 420. 

f, n.m Hi. v. State of Rajasthan. A. I. R. 1953 S. C. 35t * M4. Viiiq ▼. 

* R S.C. 115; DwatU Prasad r. State of Uttar 

Pradesh, A. I. R- 1954 S. C. 224. 

7. A. I, R. 1954 S.C. 210. 



126 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA (Chap. 

citizen. Elimination and exclusion is inherent in such business as that of 
liquor. 

(7) The word ‘restriction’ includes ‘prohibition’ also. In Narendra 
Kumar v. Union of India, 1 2 the Non-Ferrous Metal Order, 1958, which comp- 
letely excluded the dealers in a trade of imported coffee, was held vaild as 
imposing reasonable restriction in the interests of general public. The Court 
said that prohibition is only a kind of restriction provided it satisfies the test 
of reasonableness. 

(8) In Shree Meenakshi Mills v. Union of India, 1 the validity of Cotton 
Textile (Control) Order, 1948 was challenged. The Order confers power to 
impose control over distribution of yarn. The object of the order was to 
secure proper distribution of cloth. The order required producer to deliver 
yarn only to the five channels of distribution mentioned therein. The pro- 
ducers of yarn ate prohibited from selling or delivering yam to any person 
other than the five channels mentioned in the order. The channels of distribu- 
tions are agencies of the State for distribution purposes. It was contended 
that the order created monopoly in favour of specified persons and imposed 
unreasonable restriction on their rrght to carry on business under Article 19 
(1) (f) & (g) of the Constitution. 

The Court held that the distribution control is intended to ensure avail- 
ability of yarn at reasonable fair price. Profiteering, hoarding, cornerring are 
the evils to be eliminated. It is not that alt dealers in yarn have been denied 
the right to carry on trade. It is those whose carrying on trade in yam would 
not in the opinion of the Textile Commissioners ensure availability of yarn to 
actual consumers at the fair price would be subjected to such restriction. 
Black marketing is to be weeded out ia this manner. The selection of traderj 
is made on the basis of ensuring availability of yarn at a fair price. Elimina- 
tion of persons who have boarded or cornerrcd or are Unscrupulous in distri- 
bution are intended in the public interest. This is a reasonable restriction in 
the interest of the general public and is contemplated in Art. 19 (I) (g) of the 
Constitution. 

In fixiDg prices the Textile Commissioner is guided by the provisions of 
clause 30 of the Order as well as by section 3 of the Essential Commodities 
Act. Prices arc fixed with limited profit to traders. An aggrieved person can 
appeal to the Central Government. 

It was contended that the prices are fixed arbitrarily and without caring 
for the changes in the cost of production of yarn. The Court said that mere 
suggestion that no provision is made for adjustment on account of changes in 
the cost of production does not amount to infringement of fundamental right 
to carry on business and to hold and dispose of property. It caDnot be said 
that increase in yarn prices was on account of cost of production. The fixing 
of controlled price is much more than a fair price to the producer on the date 
it is fixed. Even if there is increase in the cotton prices, the controlled prices 
fixed is more fair to the producer. If he sustains alleged losses for some time, 
it will be a reasonable restriction because the object of the price control is to 
hold the price line or reduce the prices to normal levels and make available 
cotton yarn to the handloom and powerloom weavers at a fair price which will 
enable them to v ithstand competition from mill-made cloth The controlled 

1. A.I.R. 1S60 S.C.430 ; Krishna Kumar v. State of J- & K., A. I. R. 1967 S. C. 

1368. 

2. A. I R. 1914 S. C. 366, 



9 ] 


RIGHT TO FREEDOM 


127 


price is not so grossly inadequate that, it not only result huge losses but also 
is a threat to the supply position of yarn. The controlled price is in the 
interest of the country as a whole for just distribution of basic necessities. 
The controlled price is neither arbitrary nor an unreasonable restriction. 

(9) In Vishnu Dayal v. State of U. P., 1 the Government issued an order 
under the U. P. Krishi LTtpadan Mandi Adhiniyam, 1964, as amended by Act 
of 1970 requiring the petitioners to provide storage facilities to the producers 
for their agricultural produce going to the market. The Court held that the 
provision of the Act which requires traders to provide storage space to the 
producers for their agricultural produce going to the market is not unreason- 
able restriction on the fundamental rights of traders. The rule prescribing 
the mode of sale, viz. by open auction and thus protecting private sale cannot 
be said to be an unreasonable restriction on the right to trade. Sale by auction 
is a well-known mode of sale by which the producers, for whose interest the 
Act has been made, can obtain the best price for their commodities. 

(10) In Chandra Kant Saha v. Union of India, 2 3 it has been held that 
sections 5 and 6 of the Rice Milling Industry (Regulation) Act, 1958 as 
amended in 1968 which require the petitioners, the owners of existing rice mills, 
to make an application for obtaining a licence for a new hushing rice, imposes 
reasonable restrictions on the right to carry on their trade and business. Sec. 5 
requires permits to be taken for a new or defunct rice mill. Sec. 6 requires the 
owner of an existing rice mill to make an application to the licensing officer 
foi the grant of a licence for carrying on Rice Milling operation in the rice 
mill. The petitioners contended that the provisions of the Act which require 
the petitioners to take licence for operating the mills amount to complete 
destruction of their right to carry on business. The Supreme Court however 
held that the provisions of Secs. 5 and 6 are purely regulatory in character and 
are in public interest and is meant to carry out the purposes of the Act, (that 
is to say, to preserve and protect the indigenous and hand pounding industry of 
rice growers) and hence amount to unreasonable restriction on the right to carry 
on their trade and business. The Act does not leave any discretion in the 
licensing officer to grant or to refuse to grant a liceocc. He has a mandatory 
duty under Sec. 6 (3) to grant a licence, if the conditions required by the Act 
are complied with, as is clear from the word “shall” used in tnat section. 
Section 7 lays down the conditions on which the licensing officer can revoke or 
suspend the licence, after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause, 
against the action proposed, to be taken. Thus the provisions of the Act 
contain sufficient guidelines for the exercise of the power given to the licensing 
officer. 

In Khatki Ahmad v. Ludi Municipality , s the petitioner was refused a 
licence for opening a meat shop by the Municipality under a bye-law which 
gave power to the municipality to grant or to refuse licences. The licence 
was refused on the ground that there were already three licensed meat shops 
including one who is the father of the petitioner, and it is quite conceivable that 
the fourth to the petitioner will be more than necesssary in such a small munici- 
pality. Moreover the court cannot dismiss as irrelevant the consideration 
of the strong feeling ofthe local people resulting in law and order problem. 
No person has right to chose a particular spot for opening his shop. The 
local authorities are the best judge whether a licence is to be given to a person 

1. AtR 1974 SC 1489. 

Z AIR 1979 SC 314. 

3. AIR 1979 SC 418. 



128 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap 


to open a meat shop at a particular place. The ground on which the municipal 
body had refused licence was not irrelevant and can not be described as 
unreasonable within the meaning of Art. 19 (6) of the Constitution. The bye- 
laws permitting the municipality as the licensing authority to refuse license on 
the above grounds were therefore valid. 

Instances of Unreasonable Restrictions. — (1) In Chintaman R ao v. Slate of 
M. P., 1 law authorised the Government to prohibit all persons residing m 
certain areas from eDgagiog themselves in the manufacture of birls during tbe 
agricultural season. The object of the law was to provide adequate labour 
for agricultural purposes in ii>/-raaking areas. The Supreme Court held the 
law invalid as it imposed unreasonable restriction oa the 6/r/-making business 
of the area. The Act is much in excess of the object which tbe law seeks In 
achieve. It Dot only compels those who are engaged in agricultural work from 
taking other vocation but also prohibits persons, such as infirm, disabled, old 
women and children incapable of working as agricultural labourers from 
engaging themselves in the business of fc/ri-making and thus earning their 
livelihood, it was arbitrary and wholly unreasonable. 

it* 0r ° rdcr _ w bich gives arbitrary powers to the Government and 

and withnnt refuse or cancel a licence without assigning any reason 

unreasonable 8 r<*«t 8 * 0 PP° rt “™‘y to tbe applicant to be heard impose 
on the r, S ht of the citizens to carry on any 
U P Coal Ht™i nT S ; nt ?“ mDwarka Prasad v. State ofU.P .* the 
ing seliine or *tr>r;no 0 f der, i 19S f’ re£ l u ' red a person to take a licence for stock* 
(the District M»»U»r 8 /\ f ** c of coal - Under the Order the licensing authority 
licence and may susMnd my ^ " fuic 10 8«nt, renew or refuse to renew a 
thereof" cZ mh I? 1 revoke, or modify any licence on any terms 

unrestricted dhcSnnri W thc ?r ? er invalid * on the 8 round lhat il gave 

refuseor canceYheSnp/^ power to the licensing authority, who could grant. 

uncontrolled, arbitrary adminU,,Mt« irbitranl ly exercising his powers. Any 
in respect of trade discretion to restrict a citizen s right 

imposing an unreasonable ,ddus . ,r y cannot be permitted as it would be 
Article 19.* e rcs triction outside the scope of clause (6) of 

a Sugar^ Con! rot Order *1!!a L l?' v ’ Unhn °f -India* the Government issued 
sugar for sale in ooen mTi”, lfce . Esse " lial ConiDiodities Act, 1955 releasing 
of sugar within 26 davs n and a,,owcd the sugar company for disposal 
could not be disnosed non-availability of railway wagons sugar 

sion of time which wa* ~r. j dayS- The company applied for the exten- 
deration in the present . sed °y the Government. The question for consi- 
m refusing extension of W ? S the Central Government was justified 

open market. ume ,0 appellants to clear sugar released in the 

Supreme Court held that the period of 26 days could not be coasi- 
'• A 'R 1955 SC 118 

2- AIR 1954 SC2J4 

“oSe‘ y ^pnttolS’Sr* 1 ?m , norti* t R Tramw »y* Ltd . AtR 1964 SC 1279 ; Govindji v. 
s oner 0 r PoIk*. A IR i«i 1969 SCJ9J:Kishan Cbandv. Comnm- 

, . 151 SC7( >5 ; Fedco (P) Ltd. v. Bilgrami.AIR I960 SC 

4. AIR 1970 s C ,070 



9 ) 


RIGHT TO FREEDOM 


129 


dered as reasonable in view of the fact that th; sugar would have to be sent 
out of States in which it was produced and transported through railway. The 
restrictions imposed on the appellants was, therefore, unreasonable. The 
Court said that the right to trade is a guaranteed freedom which can be restric- 
ted only by law and not by exclusive order. Accordingly, it is not only the 
law restricting the freedom which should be reasonable, but the orders made 
on the basis of that law should also be reasonable. 


(4) Ini?. H. Hegde v. Market Committee, Sirsi, 1 2 3 the Government issued 
a notification in 1965 under section 4-A of the Bombay Agricultural Produce 
Market Act, 1939, declaring certain area a principal market yard in superses- 
sion of its earlier notification issued in 1954. 1 he petitioner challenged the 
validity of the order on the ground that it imposed unreasonable restriction 
on his fundamental right to carry on business. The Supreme Court held that 
the order is violative of petitioners’ fundamental right to carry on business of 
dealers who have to shift their business from the old notified principal market 
yard within a short period of 10 days. 


Taxation not restriction.— The fundamental right of a citizen to practise 
any profession or carry on any trade or business is not wholly free from the 
taxing power of the State. No citizen has right to carry on his trade without 
ravine taxes lawfully levied by the Government. In Kaitash Nath v. State of 
U.P? it was held that a tax law ‘otherwise valid’ creates no unreasonable 
restriction. 


Professional and Technical Qualifications.— The State can by law pres- 
rVihe nrcfessional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any pro- 
fe sionot carrying on any occupation, trade or business. For example, it 
ran prescribe that one who wants to set up in medical practice should have 
Studied a course in medicine and surgery and should have passed M.B.B.S. exa- 
mination or one who wishes to be a lawyer must have passed LL. B. examma- 
linn from any established university. Following are some of the existing Indian 
Acts which regulate professions requiring qualification, discipline, etc. 


1. The Advacates Act. 

2. The Bar Councils Act. 

3. The Legal Practitioners Act. 

4. Indian Medical Degrees Act 

5. Indian Medical Councils Act. 


6. Pharmacy Act. 

7. The Provincial Moneylenders Act. 

8. The Usurious Loans Act. 

9. The Bengal Touts Act. 

10. The Bengal Dentists Act. 


mate Trading and Notification.-Clause (6) (ii) enables States to nationa- 
S< ! C “ and carry it on itself to the exclusion of all citizens, 

hse any tr * de f This clause w a S added by the Constitution (First Amend- 
had become necessary as a result of the 
£51. ?; !?.L7of ilfoia.lv. OH" Pradesh G In Ibis case thn 


1. AIR 1971 SC 1017. 

2. AIR 1957 SC 790, 

3. AIR 1951 All 257. 

Const. 17 



130 


CONSTITUTIONAL, LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


Government of Ultar Pradesh refused to issue permits to private owners of road 
transport vehicles in order to enable the State to take over particular services. 
The Motor Vehicles Act required private owners of road transport vehicles to 
obtain permits from the regional authority. But it exempted the State-owned 
buses from the necessity of taking permit. The Allahabad High Court held 
that if the State carries on a commercial undertaking it cannot claim _ any 
special treatment and refusal of permit by the State was held to be in viola- 
tion of equal protection guaranteed by Article 14. The creation of a State 
monopoly could neither be justified under the power of regulation of traffic 
nor under the cover or putting restrictions under clause (6) of Article 19 
except in the interest of the general public. Nationalisation of the road trans- 
port business, it was declared, could not be brought about by indirect means 
and abuse of statutory discretion to grant new permits, or to renew the existing 
permits under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. 

The amended clause (6) of Article 19, now provides that “nothing. ..shall 
affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it relates to, or prevent the 
State from making any law relating to..(ii) the carrying on by the State or by 
a corporation owned or controlled by the State of any trade, business, industry 
or services, whether to the exclusion complete or partial, of citizens or other- 
wise." This clause makes it possible for a State to create a monopoly in its 
favour in respect of any trade oc business by excluding similar rights of 
citizens It removes the obligation of the State to justify its monopoly in 
trade or business as a reasonable restriction on citizen’s right to carry on the 
same business or trade. The amendment exculdes all argument in regard to 
the ouster of private citizens from any trade or business which the State 
decides to carry on itself to the entire or partial exclusion of the citizens’. 4 
This means that the creation of State monopolies shall not be considered to 
deprive a citizen of the freedom of trade or occupation. The validity of a law 
creating State monopoly or permitting nationalisation of a trade or business 
shall not be open to challenge either on the ground that the restriction 
imposed by it are unreasonable or that they are not in the interest of the 
general public* Thus the right of the citizen is constitutionally subjected to 
the overriding right of the State to create a monopoly in any trade or 
business.® 


1. Ram Chandra v. Stale of Orissa, AIR 1956 SC 29J. 

2. Akadasi v. Slate of Orissa, AIR 1963 SC 1047 ; see also Saghir Ahmad v. Slate of U.P., 
AIR 1954 SC 72S ; Rarnchandrs Palai ». Slate of Orissa, AIR 1956 SC. 29S. 

3. Prabhaoi Transport Co-opera live Society v. G. V. Bedekar, AIR 1960 Bom. 278. 



xo 

Protection in Respect of Conviction 
for Offences (Art. 250) 

Article 20 of the Indian Constitution provides the following safeguards to 
the persons accused of crimes 

(a) Ex post facto taw : Clause (l) of Article 20. 

(b) Double jeopardy : Clause (2) of Article 20. 

(c) Prohibition against self-incrimination : Clause (3) or Article 20. 

A. Protection against Ex post facto law. —Clause (1) of Art. 20 of the 
Indian Constitution says that “no person shall be convicted of any offence 
except for violation of a law in force at the time of the commiission of the act 
charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a penalty greater than that which 
might have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of (he commission 
of the offence. 

Article 20 (l) imposes a limitation on the law-making power of the Legis- 
lature. Ordinarily, a Legislature can make prospective as well as retrospective 
laws, but clause (I) of Article 20 prohibits the Legislature to make retrospec- 
tive criminal laws. However.it does not prohibit imposition of civil liability 
retrospectively, i. e., with effect from a past date. 1 2 3 4 5 So, a tax can be imposed 
retrospectively.* 

An ex post facto law is a law which imposes penalties retrospectively /. e., 
on acts already done and Increases the penalty for such acts. The American 
Constitution also contains a similar provision prohibiting ex post facto laws 
both by the Central and the State Legislatures. 

The first part of clause (1) provides that no person shall be convicted of 
any offence except for violation of ‘law in force’ at the time of the commission 
of the act charged as an offence. This means that if an act is not an offence 
at the date of its commission it cannot be offence at the date subsequent to its 
commission. 8 In Pareed Lubha v. Nilambaram ,* it was held that if the non- 
payment of the Panchayat Tax was not an offence on the day it fell due the 
defaulter cannot be convicted for the commission to pay under a law passed 
subsequently even if it covered older dues. The protection afforded by clause 
(1) is available only against conviction or sentence for a criminal offence under 
ex post facto law and not against the trial. Under the American law the prohi- 
bition applies even in respect of trial. The guarantee in American Constitution 
is thus wider than that under the Indian Constitution. The protection of Cl. (1) 
of Art. 20 cannot be claimed in cases of preventive detention, 6 7 or demanding 
security from a person.* The prohibition is just for conviction and sentence 
only and not for prosecution and trial under a retrospective law. So, a trial 
under a procedure different from what it was at the time of the commission of 
the offence or by a special court constituted after the commission of the offence 
cannot ipso facto be held unconstitutional. 1 

1. Hathi Singh Manufacturing Co.' v. Union of India, AIR 1960 SC 923. 

2. Sundarararoier & Co. v. State or Andhra Pradesh. AIR 1958 SC 468. 

3. Chief Inspector of Mines v. K. C. Thapper, AIR 1961 SC 838. 

4. AIR 1967 Ker. 153. 

5. Prahlad Knshoav. State of Bombay, AIR 1952 Bom. 1. 

6. State of Bihar v. Shailabata, AIR 1952 SC 329. 

7. Shiv Bahadur Singh v. State of Vindbya Pradesh, AIR 1963 SC 394 ; Venkatarman 

v. Union of India, AIR 1954 SC 375 ; Union of tndia v. Sukumar, AIR 1966 SC 

1206. 



130 


C0NST1TUI10NAL LAW OP INDIA 


jChap. 


Government of Uttar Pradesh refused to issue permits to private owners of road 
transport vehicles in order to enable the State to take over particular services. 
The Motor Vehicles Act required private owners of road transport vehicles to 
obtain permits from the regional authority. But it exempted the State-owned 
buses from the necessity of taking permit. The Allahabad High Court held 
that if the State carries on a commercial undertaking it cannot claim any 
special treatment and refusal of permit by the Slate was held to be in viola- 
tion of equal protection guaranteed by Article 14. The creation of a State 
monopoly could neither be justified under the power of regulation of traffic 
nor under the cover of putting restrictions under clause (6) of Article 19 
except in the interest of the general public. Nationalisation of the road trans- 
port business, it was declared, could not be brought about by indirect means 
and abuse of statutory discretion to grant new permits, or to renew the existing 
permits under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. 

The amended clause (6) of Article 19, now provides that "notbing...sha!I 
affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it relates to, or prevent the 
State from making any law relating to..(ii) the carrying on fay the State or by 
a corporation owned or controlled by the State of any trade, business, industry 
or services, whether to the exclusion complete or partial, of citizens or other- 
wise.” This clause makes it possible for a State to create a monopoly in its 
favour in respect of any trade or business by excluding similar rights of 
citizens. It removes the obligation of the State to justify its monopoly io 
trade or business as a reasonable restriction on citizen's right to carry on the 
same business or trade. The amendment exculdes all argument in regard to 
the ouster of private citizens from any trade or business which the State 
decides to carry on itself to the entire or partial exclusion of the citizens’.* 
This means that the creation of State monopolies shall not be considered to 
deprive a citizen of the freedom of trade or occupation. The validity of a law 
creating State monopoly or permitting nationalisation of a trade or business 
shall not be opea to challenge either on the ground that the restriction 
imposed by it are unreasonable or that they are not in the interest of the 
general public.* Thus the right of the citizen is constitutionally subjected to 
the overriding right of the State to create a monopoly in any trade or 
business. 8 


1. Ram Chandra v. State of Orissa, AIR 1956 SC 2«8. 

2. Akadasi v. State ot Orissa, AIR 1963 SC 1047 ; see also Saghit Ahmad v. State of U.P., 
AIR 1954 SC 728 ; Ramchandra Palai v. State of Orissa, AIR 1955 SC. 298. 

3. Prabbaoi Transport Co-cpcraove Society v. G. V. Bedekar, AIR I960 Bom. 278. 



x° 

Protection in Respect or Conviction 
for* Offences (Apt. 20) 

Article 20 of the Indian Constitution provides the following safeguards to 
the persons accused of crimes 

(a) Ex post facto law : Clause (1) of Article 20. 

(b) Double jeopardy : Clause (2) of Article 20. 

(c) Prohibition against self-incrimination : Clause (3) of Article 20. 

A. Protection against Ex post facto law.— Clause (I) of Art. 20 of the 
Indian Constitution says that “no person shall be convicted of any offence 
except for violation of a law in force at the time of the comraiission of the act 
charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a penalty greater than that which 
might have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of the commission 
of the offence. 

Article 20 (1) imposes a limitation on the law-making power of the Legis- 
lature. Ordinarily, a Legislature can make prospective as well as retrospective 
laws, but clause (I) of Article 20 prohibits the Legislature to make retrospec- 
tive ciiminal laws. However, it does not prohibit imposition of civil liability 
retrospectively, i. e., with effect from a past date. 1 So, a tax can be imposed 
retrospectively,* 

, An ex post facto law is a law which imposes penalties retrospectively i. e., 

on acts already done and increases the penalty for such acts. The American 
Constitution also contains a similar provision prohibiting ex post facto laws 
both by the Central and the State Legislatures. 

The first patt of clause (1) provides that no person shall be convicted of 
any offence except for violation of ‘law in force’ at the time of the commission 
of the act charged as an offence. This means that if an act is not an offence 
at the date of its commission it cannot be offence at the date subsequent to its 
commission. 8 In Pareed Lubha v. Nilambaram * it was held that if the non- 
payment of the Paochayat Tax was not an offence on the day it fell due the 
defaulter cannot be convicted for the commission to pay under a law passed 
subsequently even if it covered older dues. The protection afforded by clause 
(1) is available only against conviction or sentence for a criminal offence under 
ex post facto law and Dot against the trial. Under the American law the prohi- 
bition applies even in respect of trial. The guarantee in American Constitution 
is thus wider than that under the Indian Constitution. The protection of Cl. (1) 
of Art. 20 cannot be claimed in cases of preventive detention, 6 or demanding 
security from a person, 8 The prohibition is just for conviction and sentence 
only and not for prosecution and trial under a retrospective law. So, a trial 
under a procedure different from what it was at the time of the commission of 
the offence or by a special court constituted after t be commission of the offenee 
cannot Ipso facto be held unconstitutional. 1 

1. Hatbi Singh Manufacturing Co.' v. Union of India, AIR I960 SC 923. 

2. Sundararamier & Co. v. State of Andhra Pradesh. AIR 1958 SC 468. 

3. Chieflnspector of Mines v. K. C. Thapper, AIR 1961 SC 838. 

4. ’ AIR 196? Ker. 155. 

5. Prahlad Krishna v. State of Bombay, AIR 1952 Bom. 1. 

6. State of Bihar v. Shailabala, AIR 1952 SC 329. 

7 Shiv Bahadur Singh v. State of Vindhya Pradesh, AIR 1963 SC 394 ; Venlcatarman 

v. Union oflndia, AIR 1954 SC 375 ; Union of India v. Sufcumar, AIR 1966 SC 

1206. 



132 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Chap. 


The second part of clause (1) protects a person from ‘a penalty greater 
than that which he might have been subjected to at the time of the commission 
of the offence. 1 2 3 .In Kedar Nath v. Stale of West Bengal ,« the accused commu- 
ted an offence in 1947, which under the Act then in force was punishable by 
imprisonment or fine or both. The Act was amended in 1949 which enhanced 
the punishment for the same offence by an additional fine equivalent to the 
amount of money procured by the accused through the offence. The Supreme 
Court held that the enhanced punishment could not be applicable to the act 
committed by the accused in 1947 and hence set aside the additional fine 
imposed by the amended Act. 

But the accused can take the advantage of the beneficial provision of the 
ex post facto law. Thus in Rattan Lai v. State of Punjab ,* a boy of 16 years 
was convicted for committing an offence of house-trespass and outraging the 
modesty of a girl aged 7 years. The Magistrate sentenced him for 6 months of 
rigorous imprisonment and also imposed fine. After the judgment of the 
Magistrate, the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, came into force. It pro- 
vided that a person below 21 years of age should not ordinarily be sentenced to 
imprisonment. The Supreme Court by a majority of 2 to I held that the rute 
of beneficial interpretation required that ex post facto law could be applied to 
reduce the punishment. So an ex past facto law which is beneficial to the 
accused is not prohibited by clause (1) of Art. 20. 

B. Protection against Doable Jeopardy— Clansc (2) —Article 20 (2) of 
our Constitution says that “no person shall be prosecuted and punished for the 
same offence more than once”. This clause embodies the Common law rule 
of “ nemo debet vis vexarl," which means that no man should be put twice in 
peril for the same offence. If he is prosecuted again for the same offence for 
which he has already been prosecuted he can take complete defence of his 
former acquittal or conviction. 

The American Constitution incorporates the same rule in the Fifth 
Amendment that "no person shall be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb.” 
The protection under clause (2) of Art. 20 is narrower than that given in 
American and British laws. Under the American and the British Constitution 
the protection against double jeopardy is given for the second prosecution for 
the same offence irrespective of whether an accused was acquitted or convicted 
in the first trial. But under Article 20 (2) the protection against double 
punishment is given only when the accused has not only been ‘prosecuted’ but 
also ‘punished’ and is sought to be prosecuted second time for the same 
offence. No protection is given if the accused is acquitted in the first instance 
after the prosecution. The use of the word ‘prosecution thus limits the scope 
of the protection under clause (1) of Article 20. If there is no punishment for 
the offence as a result of the prosecution, the Supreme Court has said, clause 
(2) of Article 20 has no application and an appeal against an acquittal if pro- 
vided by the procedure is in substance a continuance of the prosecution.* The 
word ^prosecution’ as used with the word ‘punishment’ embodies the following 
essentials for the application of double jeopardy rule. They are : 

(I) The person must be accused of an ‘offence’. The word ‘offeace’ as 
defioed in General Clauses Act means ‘any act or omission made punishable 
by law for the time being in force’. 

1. AIR 1953 SC 404. 

2. AIR 1965 SG AH. 

3. Sm«. Kalawaii v. H. P. Stale, AtR 1953 SC 131 it p. 15^, 



101 


PROTECTION IN RRSPFCT OF CONVICTION FOR OFFENCES 


133 


(2) The proceeding or The prosecution roust have taken place before a 
“court” or “judicial tribunal”. 

(3) The person must have been ‘prosecuted’ and ‘punished’ in the previ- 
ous proceedings. 

(4) The ‘offence’ must be the same for which he was 'prosecuted and 
punished* in the previous proceedings. 

In AfaqSool Husain v. State of Bombay, 1 the appellant brought some 
gold into India. He did not declare that he had brought gold with him to the 
Customs authorities on (he airport. The customs authorities confiscated the 
gold under the Sea Customs Act. He was later on charged for having commit- 
ted an offence under the Foreign Exchange Regulations Act. The appellant 
contended that second prosecution was in violation of Article 20 (2) as it was 
for the same offence, i. e. for importing gold in contravention of Government 
notification for which be had already been prosecuted and punished as his gold 
had been confiscated by the customs authorities. The Court held that the Sea 
Custom Authorities was not a court or judicial tribunal and the adjudging 
of confiscation under the Sea Customs Act did not constitute a judgment of 
judicial character necessary lo take the plea of double jeopardy. Hence the 
second prosecution, under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, is not barred.' 

Similarly, proceedings before departmental and administrative authorities 
cannot he a proceeding of judicial nature. 

In Venkaiaraman v. Union of India, 2 3 4 the appellant was dismissed from 
service as a result of an inquiry under the Public Service Enquiries Act, 1960, 
after the proceedings were held before the Enquiry Commissioner. Later on, 
he was prosecuted for haying committed the offence under Indian Penal Code 
and the Prevention of Corruption Act. The Court held that the proceedings 
taken against the appellant before the Enquiry Commissioner did not amount 
to a prosecution for an offence. The enquiry held by the Commissioner was 
in the nature of fact fiDdiDg to advise the Government for disciplinary action 
against the appellant It cannot be said that the person has been prosecuted. 
Hence, the second prosecution of the appellant was held not to attract the 
application of the double jeopardy protection guaranteed by Article 20 (2). "• 

Article 20 (2) will have no application where punishment is not for the 
same offence. Thus if the offences • are distinct the ruTe of double jeopardy 
will not apply. A person was prosecuted and punished under Sea Customs 
Act ; and was later on prosecuted under the Indian Penal Code for criminal 
conspiracy. It was held that the second prosecution was not barred since it 
was not for the same offence.* 

Likewise, chase (2) of Art. 20 does not apply where tbe person is pro- 
secuted and punished for the second time and subsequent proceeding is a mere 
continuation of the previous proceedings, e. g. in the case of an appeal agaiast 
acquittal.* Thus where a number of persons were punished for smuggling 
currency notes, arms and ammunition, and were later prosecuted for criminal 
conspiracy for canyirg out their trade, it was held that the second prosecution 


I. AIR 19S3 SC 325 l See aho H. H- Advaai v. Stale of Maharashtra, AIR 1971 SC 41. 

2- AIR 1954 SC 375. 

3. Leo Roy v. Superintendent, District Jail, AIR 1958 SC 1 19. 

4. State of M. P. v. Veereshwar, (1957) SCR 868. 



134 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


(Chap 


was not forbidden although it related to the same offence, f. e. smuggling 
currency notes, etc. for which they had already been prosecuted and punished. 1 * 3 4 5 

C. Prohibition against self-locrirainat ion— Clause (3). — Clause (3) of Art. 
20 provides that ‘no person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a 
witness against himself”. Thus Article 20 (3) embodies the general principle 
of English and American jurisprudence that no one shall be compelled to give 
testimony which may expose him to prosecution for crime. _ The cardinal prin- 
ciple of criminal law which is really the bed rock of English jurisprudence is 
that an accused must be presumed to be innocent till the contrary is proved. 
It is the duty of the prosecution to prove the offence. The accused need not 
make any admission or statement against his own free will. The Fifth Amend- 
ment of the American Constitution declares that “no person shall be 

compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself”. 

The fundamental rule of criminal jurisprudence against self-incrimination 
has been raised to a rule of constitutional law in Article 20 (3). This guarantee 
extends to any person accused of an offence, and prohibits all kinds of com- 
pulsion to make him a witness against himself. Explaining the scope of this 
clause in A/. P. Sharma v. Satlsh Chandra* the Supreme Court observed that 
this right embodies the following essentials : 

(1) It is a right pertaining to a person who is “accused of an offence”. 

(2) It is a protection against “compulsion to be a witness”. 

(3) It is a protection against such compulsion resulting in his giving 
evidence “against himself". 

1. Accused of an offence.— The words ‘accused of an offence’ make it 
clear that this right is only available to a person accused of an ofTence. A 
person is said to be an accused person against whom a formal accusation 
relating to the commission of an offence has been levelled which in normal 
course may result in his prosecution and conviction. 8 It is not necessary that 
the actual trial or inquiry should have started before the court. Thus in M. P. 
Sharma v. Saiish Chandra ,* it was held lhai a person, whose name was men- 
tioned as an accused in the first information report by the police and investiga- 
tion was ordered by the Magistrate, can claim the protection of this guarantee. 

i The mere fact that at the relevant time the person was arrested on suspi- 
cion of having committed an offence under seciion 124 of the Bombay Police 
Act 8Dd a panchnama had been prepared seising (he goods were immaterial 
when neither the case / was registered nor the F. I. R. was recorded by the 
police. Thus where a custom officer arrests a person and informs him of the 
grounds of his arrest for the purpose of holding an inquiry into the violation 
of the provisions of the Sea Customs Act there is no formal accusation of an 
offence. 5 1 

This shows that the guarantee in our Constitution is narrower than that 
in the American Constitution . In America the protection of self-incrimination 

I. G. D. Bhattar v. Slate, AIR 19J7 Cal 481 at p. 492 ; Saharanput Municipality v. K. 
Ram, AIR 1965 All. 160. 

!2. AIR 1954 SC 300 ; Raja Narain Lai v. M. P. Mistry, AIR 1961 SC 29/ ' > 

3. Narayan Lai v. M. P. Mistry, AIR 1961 SC 29 ; R K. Dalmia v. Delhi Administration, 
AIR 1962 SC J 821 ; K. Joseph v. Narayanan. AIR J.%4 SC 1552. 

4. AIR 1954 SC 300 ; See also R. B. Shah v. D.K. Guha, AIR 1971 SC 1196. 

5. Vtera Ibrahim v. State of Maharashtra. AIR 1076 SC 1167. 



10] PROTECTION IN RESPECT OF CONVICTION FOR OFFENCES 13$ 

is not confined to the accused only. ‘It is also available to witness. 1 2 3 The posi- 
tion Is the same in English Jaw. But the protection under clause (3) of Article 
20 is only available to the accused. 

2. To be a witness.— The protection is against compulsion "to be a 
witness’'. “To be a witness” the Court observed in M. P. Sharma v. Satish 
Chandra , a means nothing more than “to furnish evidence” and such evidence 
can be furnished through lips or by production of a thing or of a document 
or in other inodes. In short, it includes oral, documentary and testimonial 
evidence. The protection under Article 20 (3) covers not merely testimonial 
compulsion in a court-room but also compelled testimony previously obtained 
—any compulsory process for production of evidentiary document which are 
reasonably likely to support the prosecution against him. The Court accepted 
the definition given in the Indian Evidence Act that a person can be ‘a witness’ 
not merely by giving oral evidence but also by producing documents or 
making intelligible gestures as in the case oF a dumb witness or the like. 

If this interpretation of the phrase “to be a witness” adopted by the 
court in M. P. Sharma's case was to be followed ; the compulsory taking of 
finger impressions or specimen handwriting of an accused would come within 
the mischief of Article 20 (3). This broad interpretation, it was thought would 
certainly hamper the effective administration of crime and efficient administra- 
tion of criminal justice; 

In Stale of Bombay v. Kathi Kalu? the Supreme Court held that the 
interpretation of the phrase to be witness “given in Sharma's case was too 
broad and required a qualification”. "To be a witness” is not equivalent to 
"furnishing evidence”, that is to say, as including not merely making of oral 
or written statements but also production of documents or giving materials 
which may be relevant at a trial to determine the guilt or innocence of the 
accused. Self-incrimination can only mean conveying information based upon 
personal knowledge of the person giving information and cannot include 
merely the mechanical process of producing documents in court which may 
throw light on aDy point in controversy, but which do not contain any state- 
ment of the accused based on his personal knowledge. Thus when a person 
gives his finger impression or specimen writing or signature, though, it may 
amount to furnishing evidence in the large sense is not included within t be 
expression “to be a witness". In these cases he is not giving any personal 
testimony. They are merely materials for comparison. Hence, neither seizures 
made under search-warrant, 4 5 nor the compulsory taking of photographs, 
finger-prints or specimen writing of an - accused would come within the 
prohibition of Article 20 (3). s Wbat is forbidden under Article 20 (3) is to 
compel a person to say something from bis personal knowledge relating to the 
charge against him. 

• It has been held that the information given by an accused person after 
bis arrest to a police officer which leads to the discovery of a fact under section 
27 of the Evidence Act is admissible ia evidence under section 20 (3) of the 

1. Willis ‘Constitutional Law’, (1936). p. 419. 

2. AIR 1954 SC 300 ; See also Sec. 132, Indian Evidence Act. 

3. AIR 1961 SC 1808. 

A. M. P. Sharma v. Saudi Chandra, AIR 1954 SC 300 at p. >04. 

5. State of Bombay v. Kathi Kalo, AIR 1961 SC 1808, 



136 


conirmnioNAL law or India 


[Chap. 


Constitution. In Panhadl v. U. P. Stale, 1 2 3 an accused who was charged with 
committing a murder stated to the police that he would give the clothes of the 
deceased which he had placed in a pit and thereafter he dug out the pit in 
presence of witnesses and took out Jbe clothes which were identified os the 
clothes belonging to the deceased. The Supcrme Court held that the statement 
of the appellant was admissible in evidence. 

3. Compulsion to give evidence ‘against himself',—' The protection under 
Article 20 (3) is available only against the compulsion of accused to give evi- 
dence ‘against himself*. But left to himself he may voluntarily waive his 
privilege by entering into the witness-box or by giving evidence voluntarily 
on request. Request implies no compulsion ; therefore evidence given on 
request is adroissibte against the person giving it. s To attract the protection 
of Article 20 (3) it must be shown that the accused was compelled to make 
the statement likely to be incrioinative ofbim.. Compulsion means ‘duress* 
which includes threatening, beating or imprisoning of the wife, parent or child 
of a person. Thus where the accused makes a confession without any 
inducement, threat or promise, Article 20 (3) does not apply. 

The phrase ‘compelled testimony* means evidence procured not only by 
physical threats or violence but by psychic (Mental) atmospheric pressure, 
environmental coercion, tiring interrogative prolixity, overoearing and intimi- 
datory methods as} the hke.* Thus compelled testimony Is aoc limited to 
physical torture or coercion, but extends also to techniques of psyeological 
interrogation which can cause mental torture in a person subjected to such 
interrogation. 

In Mohd. Dastgir v. State of Madras, 4 * 6 the appellant went to the bungalow 
of Deputy Superintendent of Police to offer him bribe in a closed envelope. 
The Police officer on opening it found the envelope containing currency notes. 
He threw it at the face of the appellant who took ft. Thereftcr the police 
officer asked the appellant to hand over the envelope containing the currency 
notes. The appellant took out some currency notes from his pocket and 
placed it on the table which was seized by the police officer. The appellant 
contended in appeal before the Supreme Court that the currency notes should 
not be produced in evidence as he was compelled by the police officer to give 
to him. The Supreme Court held that the accused was not compelled to 
produce the notes as no duress was applied on him to produce the notes. 
Moreover, the appellant was not an ‘accused’ at the time the currency notes 
were seized from him. 

In the case of Yusufalli v. State of Maharashtra ,» the scope of Article 20 
(3) was further limited. In this case a tape-recorded statement made by the 
accused though made without knowledge of the accused but without force or 
oppression was held to be admissible in evidence. 


In the recent case of /VfcnrffW Satpathi v. P. L. bhanl 4 the Supreme Court 
has interpreted clause (3) of Art. 20 widely. The appellant was a former 


1. AIR 1937 SC 211. 

2. State of Bombay v. Kalhi Kslu. AIR 1961 SC 1*08. 

3. N and mi Satpalhi v. P. L. Dhaol, AIR 1978 SC 1023. 

4. AIR I960 SC 736. 

3. AIR 1968 SC 147 ; S. K. Singh v. V. V. Giri, AIR 1970 SC 2097. 

6. Supra, Note, 2. 



101 PROTECTION IN RESPECT OF CONVICriON FOR OFFoNCES 1 37 

Chief Minister of Orissa. Certain charges of corruption were levelled against 
her and in the course of inquiry she was called upon to attend at a Police 
Station and to answer certain written questions. The appellant refused to 
answer questions and claimed the protection of Art. 20 (3). She was prosecuted 
under Sec. 179, IPC for.refusiog to answer questions put by a lawful authority. 
According to the Court, self-incrimination is Jess than “relevant'’ and more 
than ‘confessional’. Irrelevance is impermissible but relevance is licit, but 
when relevant questions are loaded with guilty inference in the event of an 
answer being supplied, the tendency to incriminate springs into existence. Tbc 
accused person cannot be forced to answer questions merely because the 
answers thereto are not implicative when viewed in isolation and confined to 
that particular case. He is entitled to keep his mouth shut if the answer 
sought has a reasonable prospect of exposing him to guilt in some other 
accusation, actual or imminent, even if the investigation is not with reference 
to that. However, he is bound to answer where there is no clear tendency to 
criminate. 

The Court held that the prohibitive sweep of Art. 20 (3) was not confined 
to evidence given in the Court room but available from the stage of police 
interrogation. This means that the protection is available when police examines 
the accused during investigation under section 161 of the Cr. P. C. Further the 
right to silence is not limited to the case for which he is examined but 
extends to the accused in regard to other offences pending or imminent 
which may deter him from voluntary disclosure of criminatory matter. 


Const. 18 



IX 

Protection of 7 Life and 
Personal Liberty 
(Art. 21) 

Introduction — Article 21 of (he Constitution lays (hat ; 

“No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except 
according to procedure established by law.” 

Prior to Afoneka Gandhi's decision Ait. 21 assured personal liberty 
of citizen's only against the atbitrary action on the part of the 
Executive. The State cannot interfere with the liberty of a citizen 
unless it can support its action by a valid law. Dut after the Alaneka 
Gandhi'* decision it now protects life and personal liberty of citizens not only 
from executive action but from an unreasonable, unjust law. 

But in no country citizens enjoy absolute liberty. Liberty has got to be 
limited in order to be effectively possessed. If people were given complete and 

absolute liberty without any locial control, the result would be ruin 

Law is a scheme of social control as distinct from self-control ; so 

that when we arc concerned with law we are concerned only with the question 

of how much personal liberty is best and how much locial control is best 

This is the principle embodied in our Constitution when 

it says that life and personal liberty are lubjet to “the procedure established 
by law". Thus the purpose of this Article is not to Impose a limitation on the 
authority of Legislature but only to protect individuals against any arbitrary or 
illegal action by the Executive. 

The Fifth Amendment or the American Constitution says that ‘no person 
shall be deprived or his life or personal liberty, except according to prowdure 
established by law'. The fourteenth Amendment imposes a similar limitation 
on the Stale authorities. 

The right guaranteed in Att. 21 is available to ‘citizens’ as well os ‘non- 
citizens’ 

Personal liberty.— The words “personal liberty” under Article 21 
if interpreted widely ate capable of including the rights mentioned 
in Article 19. Butin Gopalan's case the Supreme Court took a very literal 
view and interpreted these words very narrowly. The Court took the view that 
since the word “liberty" is qualified by Ibe word ‘personal’ which is a narrower 
concept and does not include all that is itnrhed in the term ‘liberty*. So 
interpreted it means nothing more than the liberty of the physical body- 
freedom from arrest and detention, from false imprisonment of wrongful 
confinement. In Gopala’n case,’ ‘personal liberty’ was said to mean oaly 
liberty relating to, or concerning the person or body of the individual and in 
this sense it was antithesis of physical restraint or coercion. It was further 
Yi roiled lo freedom from pnnniWt and preventive detention. The meaning 
accepted for purposes of Article 21 of the Constitution was restricted to limits 
set by Dicey,* according to whom ‘personal liberty* means a personal right 

1. Witlis— Constitutional Law and the United States, pp. 477-82. 

2. A. K. Gopatan v Slate of Madras, AIR 1950 S C 27. 

3. Dicey on Constitutional Law, fdn. 9, pp. 207-203. 



11 ] 


PROTECTION OP LIFE AND PERSONAL LIBERTY 


139 


not to be subjected to imprisonment, .arret or other physical eoercion in any 
manner that dots not admit of legal justification. 

R ravetriclive interpretation in Gopalan's case has not been accepted 

But this restrictive mterpreia d j j £ Iq Carafe Singh's case* the 

by the — ft--,- “J f“i s onal liberty’ is not only limited to 
Supreme Court took to prisons only, but is used as a compen- 

bodily restraint itselt iKelf all the varieties of rights which go to make 

of man oK tontEoi deal, ‘with in Article 19(1). 
up the personal liberty (l) deals with particular species or attributes 

In other words, Articlc 21 , a kes in and comprises the 

° f Su- ^ And finally in Mantka Gandhi v. Union of India* the Supreme Court 
residue. Anaunai y j n that case the Supreme Court has not only 

ha t°M the decbSou in Kharak Singh and Satwant Singh cases but has further 
n ?w]iSof fteSS ‘personal liberty’ in Art. 21 of the Constitution, 
me Court hfs s^d -the expression ’personal liberty- in Art.21 is of widest amp- 
Sf da it covers a variet? of rights which go to constitute the personal liberty 
nfman andsome of them have been raised to the slaws of distinct fundamental 
riaffi aidgi™ additional protection under Art. 19. The nortec, way of toter- 
nrrtine the provisions eonfetting fundamental tights, the Court satd is that the 
Irfimnt of the court should be to expend the reach and ambit of the fundmen- 
f ! Vather than to attenuate the* meaning and content by a process of 
nltfefa/constructiotu" The Court has. ’as provided by Art. .21 ofthe Const, - 
KS laid great stress on the procedural safeguards. The procedure mutt 
satisfy the requirement of natural justice,!, e. it must be just, fin and teason- 

aM ' t Maret Singh v Stole ofU. the petitioner. Kbarak Singh, had 
Kharak Stotn V _ ora J released as there was no evidence 

been charged m a nacoty Relations the Police opened a history 

against him. Under the U. P POJ.™ p X„ surveillance which included secret 
V t’ne of his house by th“poiice. domiciliary visists at night and verification 
picketing of his house oy P , D idnaIy visi!ls ’ mean visists by the police 
°f his movements and aennnes.^ ^ , h . purpose of making sure that the 
in the night to !ne P w hether he has gone out- The Supreme Court 

suspect is ataytng I ot [ts policemen were an invasion on the 

held that the dom citary ts ,' t . u!cd here somethings more is 

petitioner s personal lioeny- ^ inhibition against its depnva- 

meant than mere an at esM ^ fraUieJ b> wbich nr e i, enjoyed. The 
lion .extends to all th 1 t mutillliOT of the body or amputation of an 
provision ? i, i, tree that In Aittctle 2i the word ’liberty- is qualified by the 
arm or leg. glume “ ‘, ir t! is employed i„ order to avoid overlapping 
word -personal bn t to qua, nca mentioned in Article 19. An 

between those inc deots ' , gome and the distutbance caused to him 

unauthorised intrusion into ^^pe u onh5 iodividlla , Hence, the Polic 

is the violation domiciliary visits is plainly violative of Article 21 as 

Were' iS?°noT.» on which it could be justinrf and it must be s, rack down as 

uoconstitu state of M P 8 the Supreme Court has held that M. P. 

PolteKeS' SS b” 856 authorising domiciliary visits are conshtuhon.l 

I. vPsuterf Mxtixrashtrx, AtR 197S SC t JtS. 

] M„n I I“ 3 |lSiofti™ 51 U ’ 5 "T 



140 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA (Chap. 

as they have the fotcc of law. These Regulations were framed by the Govern- 
ment under section 46 (2) (e) of the Police Act. The pelilioner challenged 
the validity of those Regulaiions on the ground that they ate violalive of bis 
fundamental right guaranteed in Ait. 21 which also includes the right of 
privacy’. The Supreme Court held that Regulations 855 and 856 have the 
force oflaw and. therefore, they arc valid. As regards the ‘right of privacy 
the Court said that the right to privacy will necessarily have to go through a 
process of case by case development. Therefore, even assuming that the right 
to personal liberty, the right to move freely throughout the territory of India 
and the freedom of speech create an independent right of privacy as an 
emanation from them which can be characterised as a fundamental right, the 
right is not absolute. Depending upon the character and antecedents of the 
person subjected to surveillance and the object and limitations under which 
surveillance is made, it cannot be said that surveillance by domiciliary visits 
would always be unreasonable restriction upon the right of privacy. The 
impugned Regulation 855 empowers serveillance only of persons against 
whom reasonable material exist to induce the opinion that they show 'a 
determination to lead a criminal life'. The petitioner was shown to be a 
dangerous criminal whose conduct shows that he is determined to lead a crimi- 
nal life. The Regulations impose reasonable restirictions on the fuudamental 
right of petitioner guaranteed in Article 21 and, therefore, they are valid. 

It Is to be noted that in Kharak Singh's case, 1 * 3 the validity of a similar 
Police Ragulation was challenged. In that case the Regulations were declared 
unconstitutional because they did not have the force of law. On the other hand 
in Covind's case the Court held that the Regulations have the force of law and 
therefore (hey are not violative of the fundamental right of the petitioner 
guaranteed in Art. 21. It was held that the petitioner was deprived of his 
personal liberty in accordance with the procedure established by law. 

A detenue can be subjected only to such restrictions on his personal 
liberty as are authorised by or under the law of preventive detention and 
imposition of any unauthorised restriction, therefore, will violate Article 21. For 
example, in State of Maharashtra v. Prabhakar Pandurang* the petitioner was 
detained in jail under the Preventive Detention Act. He wrote a scientific book 
in prison and sought permission from the Government to send it to his wife for 
publication. The Government refused permission to him. The Court held 
that this was an infringement or his personal liberty as the restriction was not 
authorised by the Preventive Detention Act. 

In Sotnant Singh v. Assistant Passport Officer, New Delhi* the Supreme 
Court further extended the scope of this Article and held that the right to go 
abroad is part of a person’s ‘personal liberty' within the meaning of Art. 21 
of the Constitution. In that case the petitioner who was a citizen of India 
had to frequently travel abroad for business purposes. Since it had been 
decided to withdraw the passport facilities granted to him he was informed' 
by the Government of India to surrender the passport issued to him. He 
challenged the action of the Government on the ground that it viotated bis 
fundamental rights under Article 21. His contention was that right to leave 
India or travel abroad and return to India was part of his personal liberty 
which could be restricted only by authority of law. Hence the Union Govern- 
ment, ‘in the absence of any law’, in the exercise of its executive power cannot 

1. AIR 1963 SC129J. 

3. AIR 1966 SC 424. 

3, AtR 1967 SC 1836 



U] PROTECTION OF UFE AND PERSONAL LIBERTY 141 


deny him a passport without which he cannot exercise his right to travel 
abroad. The contention of the Union Government was that the right to travel 
is not included in 'personal liberty* and that a passport is a political document 
to which no one has a legal much less a constitutional right. The Supreme 
Court accepted the contention of the petitioner and held that the right to 
travel abroad is part of a person’s ‘persona) liberty* within the meaning of 
Article 21 and, therefore, no person can be deprived of his right to travel 
abroad except according to procedure established by law. In fact there was 
no such law on which the Government could justify its action The Court 
observed that the expression ‘liberty* in Article 21 is a comprehensive 
term. ‘Personal liberty’ in Article 21 takes in tbe right of locomotion— to 
go where and when one pleases, and to travel abroad. It only excludes the 
ingredients of liberty mentioned in Article 19. 

In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India," 1 the meaning and content of the 
words ‘personal liberty’ again came up for the consideration of the Supreme 
Court. In this post-Eraergency decision the Court has given a widest possible 
interpretation to the words ‘personal liberty*. The Supreme Court has not 
only upheld its earlier decisions that the right to travel aboard (and hence) 
entitled to a passport) was a Fundamental Right which could not be arbitrarily 
denied but has laid great emphasis on the procedural safeguards to be complied 
with before an individual is deprived of his personal liberty. 

In that case, the petitioner was issued a passport on 1st June, 1976 under 
the Passport Act, 1967. On 4th July, 1977, the petitioner recieved a letter from 
the Regional Passport Officer, Delhi, intimating to her that it has been decided 
by the Government of India to impound her passport under section 10 (3) (c) 
of tbe Act ‘in public interest ’ and she was, therefore, requied to surrender her 
passport within seven days from the receipt of the letter. She wrote a letter to 
the Passport Officer requesting him to furnish a copy of the statement of 
reason for making the order. The Government or India declined “ in the 
interest of the general public” to furnish the reasons for its decision. The 
petitioner filed a writ-petition under Art. 32 of tbe Constitution challenging the 
validity of the said order on the following grounds that J 

1. Section 10 (3 (c) in so far as it empowers the passport authority to 
impound a passport “in the interests of the general public” is violative of Art. 
14, since it confers vague and undefined power on the passport authority. 

2. Section 10 (3) (c) is void as conferring an arbitrary power since U 
does not provide for s hearing of the holder of the passport before the pass- 
port is impounded. 

3. Section 10 (3) (c) is violative of Art. 21. Since it does not prescribe 

‘procedure’ within the meaning of that Article and if it could be said that there 
js some procedure prescribed, ft *5 rad 

4. Section 10 (3) (c) is violative of Art. 19 (1) (a) and (g) since it permits 
imposition of restrictions not provided in clause (2) or (6) of Art. 19. 

The reasons for the order were, however, disclosed in the counter-affidavit 
filed on behalf of tbe Government The disclosure stated that the petitioner’s 
presence was likely to be required in connection with tbe proceedings before a 
Commission of Inquiry. Regarding the opportunity to be heard the Attorney- 
General filed a statement that the petitioner could make a representation in 


1. AIR 1978 SC 597. 



142 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP IN HU 


[Chap. 


respect of impounding passport and that the representation would be dealt with 
expeditiously. 

The Supreme Court by majority held that the Government was not jus- 
tified in withholding the reasons for impounding the passport from the 
petitioner. Delivering the majority judgment, Mr. Justice Bhagwati asked 
—“Does Art. 21 merely require that there must be some semblance of proce- 
dure, however arbitrary and fanciful, prescribed by law before a person can be 
deprived of the personal liberty or the procedure must satisfy certain requisites 

in the sense that it must be fair and reasonable ? Is the prescription of some 

sort of procedure enough or must the procedure comply with any particular require- 
ment ? He then held that the procedure contemplated in Art. 21 could not 
be unfair or unreasonable. And this principle of reasonableness which was an 
essential element of equality or non-arbitrariness, pervaded Art. 14 like a brood- 
ing omnipresence and the piocedurc contemplated in Art. 21 must answer 
the test of reasonableness in order to be in conformity with Art. 14. Hence, 
any procedure which permitted impairment of individuals right to go abroad 
without giving him a reasonable opportunity to be heard could not but be 
condemned as unfair and unjust. The order withholding reasons for impound- 
ing the passport was therefore not only in breach of statutory provisions 
(Passport Act) but also in violation of the rule of natural justice embodied in 
the maxim •*. audi alteram partem" (that no one shall be condemned unheard). 
Although there are no positive words in the statute requiring that the party 
shall be heard, yet the justice of the Common law will supply this omission of 
Legislature. The power conferred uoder section 10 (3) (c) of the Act on the 
passport authority to impound a passport is a quasi-judicial power. The 
rules of natural justice would therefore be applicable in the exercise of this 
power. Natural justice is a great humanising principle intended to invest law 
with fairness and to secure justice. Fairness in action, therefore, demands 
that an opportunity to be .heard should be given to the person affected. A 
provision requiring giving of such opportunity to the affected person can and 
should be read by implication in the Passport Act, 1967. If such provi- 
sions were held to be incorporated in the Act by necessary implication, the 
procedure prescribed for impounding passport would be right, fair and just and 
would not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness or unreasonableness. It must 
therefore be held that the procedures ‘establiscd’ by the Act for impounding a 
passport is in conformity with the requirement of Art. 21 and is not violative of 
that Article. 

However, in view of the statement of the Attorney-General that the Govern- 
ment is agreeable to consider the representation which would be made by the 
petitioner, it was held by the majority of the Supreme Court (Beg ,C.J dissenting 
and it xightly)tbat the defect of the order was removed and the order was there- 
fore passed by the passport authority in accordance with the procedure estab- 
lished by law. It is clear from the language of Art. 21 that the protection 
provided by it is limited one. It safeguards the right to go abroad against 
executive interference which is not supported by law. In the instant case, the 
petitioner was deprived of her right to go abroad in accordance with the pro- 
cedure established by law (Passport Act, 1967). The procedure prescribed by 
the Act is not arbitrary or unreasonable. The Act lays down proper guide- 
lines for the exercise of the powers by the passport authority. The power 
conferred on the Passport Authority is not unguided or unfettered The 
grounds denoted by the words ‘in the interests of general public’ have a clearly 
well-defined meaning and cannot be said to be as vague or undefined. These 
words are in fact taken from Art- 19 (5) of the Constitution- Section 10 (3) (c) 



U): . 


PROTECTION OF LtfB AND F EX SOS AL LIBERTY 


143 


of the Passport Act is therefore not violative of Arts. 14, 19 (1) (a) or (g) or 
Art. 21. 

As regards the argument th3t the right to go out of India is an integral 
part of the right of freedom of speech and expression the Court held that the 
right to go abroad cannot be regarded as included in freedom of speech and 
expression guaranteed by Art. 19. In fact, the right to go abroad is clearly 
not a fundamental right under any clause of Art. 19 (1). However, the court 
held that it is not necessary that a right must be specifically named in Art. 19. 
Even if a right is not specifically named in Art. 19 (1) it may still be a funda- 
mental right covered by some clause of that Article if it is an integral part 
of a named fundamental Tight or partakes of the same basic nature and 
character as that fundamental right. Every activity which facilitates the exer- 
cise of a named fundamental right is not necessarily comprehended in that 
fundamental right nor can it be regarded as such merely because it may not be 
possible otherwise to effectively exercise that fundamental right. The test i'd 
such cases is whether the right claimed by the petitioner is an integral part of a 
named fundamental right or part of the same basic nature and character as 
the named fundamental right. If this is the correct test, the right to go abroad 
cannot be regarded as included in freedom of speech and expression. It is 
no doubt true that going abroad may be necessary in a given case for exercise 
of freedom of speech and expression, but that does not make it an integral 
part of the right of free speech and expression. Since the right to go abroad 
is not a guaranteed right under any clauscof Art. 19 (I), therefore, the impo- 
sition of restrictions on this right under section 10 (3) (c) by impounding the 
passport can be held to be void as offending Art. 19 (l) (a) or (g) as its 
direct impact is on the right to go abroad and not on the right of free 
speech and expression or the right to carry on trade, business, profession or 
calling. 

Prisoner’s and Art. 21.— In D. B. M. Patnaik v. Slate of A. P., 1 the 
the Supreme Court extended the protection of Art. 21 even to convicts. The 
petitioners, who were naxalite under-trial prisoners, were undergoing the 
sentence in the Central Jail, Vishkhapatnam. They contended that the armed 
police guards posted around the Jail and the live-wire electrical machanism 
fixed on the top of the Jail is an infringement of their right to ‘life’ and ‘perso- 
nal liberty’ guaranteed under Art. 21 of the Constitution. The Court held that 
the convicts are not by mere reason of their conviction deprived of all the 
fundamental rights which they otherwise possess. Following the conviction, 
if a convict is put into the Jail he may be deprived of fundamental freedoms 
like the right to move freely throughout the territory of Iodia or the right to 
“practise” a profession. But the Constitution guarantees to them other free- 
doms like the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property for the existence 
of which detention can be no impediment. Likewise, even a convict is entitled 
to the precious right guaranteed by Art. 21 and be shall not be deprived of 
his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law. 

In this case, however, it was held that the convicts have not been deprived 
of their fundamental rights by the posting of police guards immediately out- 
side the Jail. 146 naxalite prisoners were lodged in Jail as a result of which 
usual watch and ward arrangement proved inadequate. Some prisoners had 
escaped from the prison. It was decided thereafter to take adequate measures 
preventing the escape of prisoners from jail. The Court said, ‘A convict has 
no right more than any one else to dictate where guards to be posted to pre- 

i. AIR 197* SC 2092 ; Also see Suoil Satra v. Delhi Administration, AIR 1978 SC 

1976. 



144 


CONSTI rtmONAL LAW OF INDIA • r 


(Chap. 


vent the escape of prisoners. The installation of live-wire mechanism does 
not offend their right. It is a preventive measure intended to act as a deter- 
rent and cause death only if a prisoner causes death by scaling the wall 
while attempting to escape from lawful custody. The installation of live- 
wire does not by itself cause the death of the prisoner. 

In Babu Singh v. State ofU. P., 1 it has been held that refusal to grant 
bait in a murder case without reasonable ground would amount to deprivation 
of personal liberty. In that case six appellants were convicted by the Sessions 
Judge on Nov. 4, 1972 in a murder case. In appeal by State the High Court 
convicted the appellants and sentenced them to life imprisonment. Five appel- 
lants had suffered sentence of 20 months and the sixth was on bail. These 
appellants were the entire male members of their family and all of them were 
in jail. As such, their defence was likely to be jeopardised. During appeal 
before the High Court, the State did not press for their custody. Moreover, 
there is nothing to show that during the long period of five years when the 
appellants had been out of prison pending appeal before High Court there 
had been any conduct on their part suggestive of disturbing the peace of the 
locality, threatening any one in the village or otherwise thwarting the life of the 
community or the course of justice. The appellants applied for bail during 
pendency of their appeal before the Supreme Court. The Court held that 
refusal to grant bail would amount to deprivation of personal liberty of an 
accused. Personal liberty, Krishna Iyer, J., held, is too precious a value of 
our Constitutional system recognised under Art. 21 and the crucial power to 
negate it is a great trust exercisable not casually but judicially with lively 
concern for the cost to the individual and the community. After all, personal 
liberty of an accused or convict is fundamental and can be taken away only 
in terms of ‘procedure established by law’. So, deprivation of personal 
freedom ephemeral or enduring, must be founded on the most serious con- 
siderations relevant to the welfare objectives of the society specified in the 
Constitution. 

Deprivation of liberty is a matter of great concern and permissible only 
when the law authorising it is reasonable. Reasonableness predicates that 
deprivation of freedom by refusal of bail is not for punitive purpose but for 
the bifocal interest of justice to the individual involved and society effected. 
In the circumstances of the case, the Court therefore held that the appellants 
were subject to certain safeguards, entitled to be released on bail. 

In A f, H. Hoskot v. Stale of Maharashtra , a the Supreme Court applied the 
rulings of Meneka Gandhi's case. In that case the petitioner, who was a 
Reader holding M. Sc. and Ph. D. Degrees, was convicted for the offences 
of attempting to issue counterfeit university degrees. The scheme was, how- 
ever, foiled. He was tried by the Sessions Court which found him guilty of 
grave offences but took a very lenient view and sentenced him to simple im- 
prisonment till the rising of of ihe court. The High Court allowed the State 
appeal and enhanced the punishment to three years. The High Court Judg- 
ment was pronounced in Nov. 1973., but the Special leave petition was 
filed in the Supreme Court by the petitioner after 4 years. The petitioner had 
undergone his full term of punishment. The explanation given by him for 
the condonation of delay was that he was given the copy of the judgment 
of 1973 only in 1978. It was disclosed however that although a free copy 
of the otder had been sent promptly by the High Court, meant for the app- 

1. AIR i 978 SC 327. 

2 AIR 1978 SC, 1548. 



1 1 ] PROTECTION OF LIFE AND PERSONAL LIBERTY 145 

licant, to the Suprintendent of the Jail but he claimed that he never received 
it. The Suprintendent claimed that the copy had been delivered to him but 
later it was taken back for the purpose of enclosing it with a mercy petition 
to the government for remission of sentence. The Supreme Court although 
dismissed the special leave application because of the settled practice that 
the court could not interfere with the concurrent finding of the two lower 
courts but it thought 'it to make the legal position clear. The Court held 
that a single right of appeal on facts, where the conviction is fraugb with 
long loss of liberty, is basic to civilised jurispudence. It is integral to fair 
procedure, natural justice and Every step that makes the right of 
appeal fruitful is obligatory and every action or inaction which 
stultifies it is unfair and therefore offended Art. 21. There are two ingredi- 
ents of a right of appeal -(1) service of a copy of a judgment to the prisoner 
in time to enable him to file an appeal, and (2) provision of free legal 
service to a prisoner who is indigent or otherwise disabled from securing 
legal assistance. Both these are State responsibilities under Art. 21. Any jailor 
who by indifference or vendatta, withholds the copy thwarts the court process 
and violates Art. 21 and may make the further imprisonment illegal. He 
suggested that the Jail Manuals should be updated and should include this man- 
date and the courts must make available a copy of the judgment to the prisoner. 
All the obligations arc necessarily implied in the right of appeal conferred 
by the Code read with the commitment to the procedural fairness In Art. 21. 

A second ingredient of fair procedure is a right to secure a free legal service. 
“This" said Krishna Iyer, J., who delivered the majority judgment, “is the 
State's duty and not Government’s charily". If a prisoner is unable to 
exercise ’bis constitutional and statutory right of appeal including special 
leave to appeal for want -of legal assistance, there is implicit in the court 
under Art. 142, read with Arts. 21 and 39-A of the Constitution, power to 
assign counsel to the prisoner provided he dots not object to the lawyer 
named by the court. Equally is the implication that the Slate which sets 
the taw in motion must pay the lawyer an amount fixed by the court. 

In Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration, 1 the important questions raised 
before the Supreme Court was whether solitary cofinement imposed upon priso- 
ners who were under sentence of death is violative of Arts. 14, 19, 20 and 21 
of the Constitution. In this case the two convicts who were confined in 
Tihar Central Jail filed two petitions under Art. 32. challenging the validity 
of S, 30 and S. 56 of the Prison Act. Sunil Batra was sentenced to death 
by the District and Sessions Judge and his sentence was subject to the con- 
firmation by the High Court and to a possible appeal to the Supreme 
Court. Batra complained (hat since the’ date of his conviction by Session 
Judge that is on 6th July. 1976 he was kept in solitary confinement (ill 
the Supreme Court intervened on 24th Feb., 197S. Charles Sobraj a 
foreigner, an under-trial prisoner challenged (be action of the Suprinten- 
dent of jail parting him into bar fetters, lie u«jr arrested on 6th July, 1976 
and detained under section 3 of M1SA. Since the time he was lodged in Jail 
he was put in bar fetters, notwithstanding of the recommendation of the 
Jail doctor that bar fetters be removed. It was contended that Section 30 
does not authorise prison authorities to impose the punishment of solitary 
confinement. The Supreme Court accepted the argument of the petitioners 
and held that S. 30 of the Prison Act, does not empower the prison autho- 
rities to impose solitary confinement upon a prisoner^ under sentence of 
death under S. 73 and S 74, 1. P. C., solitary confinement is itself a substantive 


|. AIR IWt SC !«7S. 
Const. 19 



146 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA (Chap. 

punishment which can be imposed by a court of law. It cannot be left 
within and caprice of prison authorities. The Court held that the expression 
“prisoner under sentence of death" in the context of S. 30 (2) can only mean the 
prisoner whose sentence of death has become final and cannot be annuled 
or violated by any judicial or constitutional procedure. Thus a prisoner was 
not under sentence of death till he has the right to appeal against his sen- 
tence or to appeal for mercy. If by imposing solitary confinement there is 
total deprivation of comaraderic (friendship) amoDgst co-prisoners, comingling 
and talking and being talked to, it would offend Art. 21 of the Constitution. 
The liberty to move, mix, mingle, talk, share company with co-prisoners, if 
substantally curtailed would be violation of Art. 21 unless the curtailment 
has the backing of law. Although solitary confinement was held to be vio- 
lative of Art. 21, section 30 was held to be valid because the procedure 
prescribed under it for the curtailment of prisoner's liberty in jail was 
fair and just within the meaning of Article 21. IfS. 30 is interpreted 
in this manner its abnoxious element is removed and it cannot be said that 
there is deprivation of personal liberty without the authority of law. In case 
of Charles Sobhraj it was contented that S. 56 of the Prison Act justified put- 
ting him in bar fetter. The petitioner contended that S. 56 is violative of Arts. 
14 and 21 as it confers unguided and arbitrary powers on the Superintendent 
to confine a prisoner in irons. The Court held that continuously keeping a 
prisoner in fetters day and night reduces the prisoner from a human being to 
an animal and that this treatment is cruel and unusual that the use of bar fetters 
is against the spirit of the Constitution. Section 56 lays down certain condi- 
tions under which it can be done. Since those conditions were not present in the 
instant case therefore putting bar fetter can not be justified. Section 56 is vatid. 
The petitions were therefore dismissed. 

In Hussainara Khatoon v. Bihar 1 {No. I) a petition for a writ of habeas 
corpus was filed by number of under-trial prisoner who were in jails in the State 
of Bihar for years awaiting their trial. The Supreme Court held that the right 
to a reasonably speedy trial was a part of the fundamental right guaranteed 
by Art. 21. Speedy trial is of the essence of criminal justice. In United States 
speedy trial is one of the constitutionally guaranteed right. Sixth Amendment 
provides that "In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right 
to a speedy and public trial”. 

Bhagwati, J. held, “although, unlike, American Constitution, speedy trial 
is not specifically enumerated as a fundamental right, it is implicit in the broad 
sweep and content of Art. 21 as interpreted in, Maneka Gandhi's Case. No 
procedure which does not ensure a reasonably quick trial can be regarded as 
'reasonable, fair or just*. For this reason the Court ordered the Bihar Govern- 
ment to release forthwith the under-trial prioners on their personal bonds. In 
Hussainara Khatoon v. Bihar , a (No. 2) the Supreme Court reiterated the principle 
that the accused has a right of a speedy trial. In Hussainara Khatoon v. 
Bihar 8 (No. 3) the Court held that where undertrial prisoners remained in jail 
without trial for periods longer than the maximum terra for which they could 
have been sentenced, if convicted, their continued detention was illegal and in 
violation of their fundamental right under Art. 21 and, as such, they must be 
released forthwith. A procedure for depriving a person of life or persona! 
liberty must be ‘reasonable, fair and just*. A procedure which does not make 

1. AIR 1979 SC 1360. 

2. AIR 1979 SC 1369. 

3. AIR 1979 SC 1377. 



Jl) 


FROTECJION OF UKANO PfMONAt LIBERTY 


147 


available legal service to on accused person who was too poor to afford a 
lawyer and who would have to go through the trial without legal assistance 
cannot be regarded as 'reasonable, fair and just’. The Court referred to the 
directive in the newly added Art. 39A which directs the State to provide le^a! 
service to an accused person who is too poor to engage a lawyer. 

Sentence of death and Arts. 21, 14— In Jagmohan Singh v. Uttar Pradesh ,* the 
petitioner challenged the validity of death sentence on the ground that it was 
violative of Art. 21 because it did not provide any procedure. It was 
contended that the procedure prescribed under Criminal Procedure Code was 
confined only to findings of guilt and not awarding of death sentence. The 
Supreme Court held that the choice of awarding death sentence is done in 
accordance with the procedurcestablished by law. The Judge makes the choice 
between capital sentence or imprisonment of life on the basis of circumstances 
and facts and nature of crime brought on record during trial. Accordingly, 
a five member Bench of the Court held that capital punishment was not 
voUativc of Arts. 14, 19 and 21 and was therefore consitutionally valid. After 
this decision the Constitutional validity o<” death sentence was not open to 
doubt. But in the recent case of Rajendra Prasad v. U. P„* Krishna 
Iyer, J. has held that capital punishment would not be justified unless it was 
shown that the criminal was dangerous to the society. He held that giving 
discretion to the judge to make choice between death sentence and life imprison- 
ment on "special reasons" under Sec. 354 (3), Cr.P.C. would be violative of Art. 
14 which condemns arbitrariness. He pleaded for the abolition of death 
penalty and retention of it only for punishing "white collar offences”, Sen, J., in 
his dessenting judgment held that the question whether the death sentence 
should be abolished or the scope of S. 302, J. P. C. and S. 354 (3) should be 
curtailed is a question to be decided by Parliament and not by the 
Court. Sen, J. held that it was constitutionally and legally impermissible while 
hearing a special leave petition on a question of sentence to restructure the 
I. P. C. and the Cr. P. C. so as to limit the scope of the sentence of death 
provided by Sec. 302, 1.P.C. for the offences of murder. It is submitted that the 
minority judgment is correct because after the amendment in the Cr. P. C. and 
the decision in the Jagmohan Singh's case the death penalty is only an 
exception and the life imprisonment is the rule. The discretion to make choice * 
between the two punishments is left to the Judges and not to the Executive. 

1 Inter-relation of Arts. 14, 19 and Art. 21. 

Old View In Gojaian's case Supreme Court bad held that Art, 19 had 
no application to the Preventive Detention Laws. The Court marked the 
following points of distinction between “personal liberty” occurring In Article 
21 and “liberty” occurring in Article 19 : (1) Articles 19 and 21 deal with 
different subjects. Article 19 deals only with certain (seven freedoms) im- 
portant ina'ividaat rights of persotai liberty and the restriction thatcaa be 
imposed on them. Article 21, on the other hand, enables the State to deprive 
individual of his life and personal liberty in accordance with procedure 
established by law. In short. Art. 19 deals with “restrictions” and Article 21 
with "deprivation” ; (2) Article 19 guarantees to the citizens the enjoyment of 
certain liberties while they are free. Article 19 thus postulates a legal capacity 
to exercise the rights guaranteed by It. But if a citizen loses the freedom of his 
person by being lawfully detained as a result of conviction for an offence or as 
a result of preventive detention under Articles 21 and 22, loses his capacity to 


1. AIR 1973 SC 947. 

2. AIR 1979 SC 916. 



148 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap, 


exticist those rights and therefore cannot claim the rights under Art. 19 ; (3) 
Article 19 is available to citizens only but Article 21 is available to both citizens 
and non-citizens ; (4) The validity of deprivation of law made under Art.21 can- 
not be judged under the test of "reasonableness" in Art. 19— -Article 19 docs not 
apply to a law of preventive detention even though as a result of an order of 
detention the rights of a citizen under Article 19 may be restricted or abridged. 
Thus the view taken by the majority in A. K. Gopalan's case was that so 
long as a law of preventive detention satisfies the requirements of Art. 22, it 
would not be required to meet the challenge of Art. 19. 

Present view ; — The view taken by the Court in Gopalan's case that the 
validity of a preventive detention law cannot be challenged on the ground 
that it does not satisfy the requirements of Art. 19 (imposes reasonable restric- 
tions’) has now been overruled. The law is now settled that Art. 21 does not 
exclude Art. 19 and that even if there is a Jaw prescribing a procedure for 
depriving a person of ‘personal liberty* and there is coosequently no infringe- 
ment of the fundamental right conferred by Art. 21 such a law in so far as it 
abridges or takes away any fundamental right under Art. 19 would have to 
meet the challenges of Art. 19. Thus a law depriving a person of ‘personal 
liberty’ has not only to stand the test of one or more of the fundamental rights 
conferred under Art. 19, but also be liable to be tested with reference to 
Art. 14.* 

‘Procedure’ and ‘Law’.— The question for interpretation of Article 
21 came for consideration before the Supreme Court in the leading case of A- 
X. Gopalan v. Slate of Madras.' In that case the petitioner A. K. Gopalan, a 
Communist leader, was detained under the Preventive Detention Act, 1950- 
The petitioner challenged the validity of the Preventive Detention Act and his 
detention thereunder on the following grounds : (1) that it violates his right to 
move freely throughout the territory of India which is the very essence of 
personal liberty guaranteed in Article 19. The detention under this Act was 
not 'a reasonable detention* under Cl. (5) of Art. 19 and hence the Act is void ; 
(2) that the Act is in conflict with Art. 21 of the Constitution inasmuch as 
it provides for deprivation of the personal liberty of a man not in accordance 
with a ‘procedure established by law’. It was argued that the word ‘law* in 
Article 21 should be understood, not in the sense of an enactment but as 
signifying the universal principles of natural justice and a law which does 
not incorporate these principles cannot be valid ; (3) that the expression ‘‘pro- 
cedure established by law” meant the same thing as the phrase "due process 
of law in the American Constitution. 

> The petitioner argued that the experssion 'procedure established by 
law was synonymous with the expression ‘due process of law* of the American 
constitution It was contended that the Indian Constitution gives the same 
protection with the only difference that while the due process clause has been 
interpreted in America to cover both substantive and procedural law, only the 
protection of procedural law is guaranteed in India. The contention was th3t 
tbe j V0fd ‘due* madc on difference to the interpretation of 
Arucle 21 ; the word ‘established’ was not equivalent to ‘prescribed', but had a 
wider meaning ; the word ‘law* did not mean enacted law, but it meant princi- 
ples of natural justice. 


^d?a V A W 1 970 SC«i 0 “ 5? J 97 * SC 594 = R- C. Cooper v. Union of 

sr riJS Darfhrin Sh ^ hu N? h Sarkar v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1973 

SC 14Z5 , i-aranan Saha V. Stale of West Bengal, AIR l f 74 SC 2154. 


?• A • K. Gopalan v. State of Madras, AIR 1950 SC 27, 



n U 


PROTECTION OF LIFE AND PERSONAL LIBERTY 


But the Supreme Court rejected the aforesaid contentions and held that 
the -procedure established by law' did not mean 'due process of law as under- 
£ America There was no justification for adopting the meaning of he 
Interpreted by the Supreme Court or America in the expression 
Mue J^ oftaw- SSely because' the -word law' is used in Article 21. This 
is clearfrom the report of the Drafting Committee of the Constituent Assembly 
n respect o“ Article 21. The Report of the Drafting Committee shows that 
m respect oi ltWfl the American expression ‘due process 


Wished bylaw’, which is more specitic. in o opaians case, me majority <w>u 
that the expression ‘procedure established by law* must mean procedure presenb- 
S bv the Uw of the State. The Court observed that it was not proper to consi- 
Her this expression in the light of the meaning given to the expression ‘due pro- 
£*of lS? ta the American Constitution by the American Supreme Court The 
Interpretation 1 put on the due process clause by American Supreme Court has 
Sn charactensed by the utmost vagueness and that it means just what the 
five jSdlefof that Court say it means. If the Constitution makers wanted to 
meseive in India the same protection as is given m America there was nothing 
to prevent the Constituent Assembly from adopting that phrase. 

Put in Afaneka Gandhi v. Union of India,' the Supreme Court basover- 
, . *AKC,oaalan' 3 ™se* and has held that the mere prescription of some 
is not enough to comply with the mandate of Art. 21. The 
kind of Procedure 6 be fair, just and reasonable and not fanciful, 

oo^s$ive^)r arbitM^ [otherwise! it shou’lcfte no procedure at all and all the 
of Art 21 would not be satisfied. What is fair or just 2 A 
nrSedmc to be fair or just must embody the principles of natural justice. 
&ffura¥jusUceis intended to invest law with fairness and to securejust.ce, the 
Court said. 

Bv accepting the concept of natural justice as one of the essential com- 
ponent or la? it is submitted that the Court has imported the American 
on nee n t of ‘due process of law’ into our Constitution. Like due process of 
law C imtural justice also not a rigid or mechanical concept. The mjes of 
justice are to be applied in the context of the situations in which It is 
hesnDlied The court itself quoted the observations of Magarry.J-. who 
of due processor lew". AndMwIa 
52“ p,mi AimWUMton? Justice Knshtli Iwc observed.: 'True 
uh ution has no ‘due process’ clause or the VIII Amendment (of the 
American'consritution) but in this branch of law, after Cooper and Maneka 
Gandhi’s cases the consequence is the same . 


Natural Justice. 

T- case it was argued that the word ‘law* in Art. 21 does not 

n piece of law but it incorporates the principles of 

merely mean an en ted Pj^J Wch depr ; v „ a person of his personal liberty 

natural justice, and h' thc rule, of P at ura l justice cannot be held to be valid 
Sfmean U^Io the atetrart or 

'■ jssaffiMSSKB^ «* 5C 3 ” iM "■ *— ' 5, - ,e 01 

2. AIR 1950 SC 27. 

J. AIR 1978 SC 1675. 


1 50 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA (Chap. 

general sense embodying the principles of natural justice as interpreted by 
the U. S. Supreme Court. 

The present view.— In Afaneka Gandhi's case, 1 the Supreme Court has held 
that the word Taw’ in Art. 21 does not mean merely an enacted piece of law 
but a reasonable law, L e., which embodies the principles of natural justice. 

Emergency and Art. 21.— The Constitution provides for the suspension of 
the rights guaranteed by Art. 21 during emergency. Article 359 empowers the ' 
President to suspend the right to move any court for the enforcement of such 
of the rights conferred by Part III as may be mentioned in the Presidential 
order, when the Proclamation of Emergency is made under Art. 352 by the 
President. 

For the first time, Art. 21 was suspended during the Emergency arising 
out of the Chinese attack in 1962. In 1971 it was suspended for the second 
time when Pakistan attacked India. In 1976 this Article was again suspended 
when Indira Gandhi’s Government declared emergency on the ground of 
internal disturbance. 

J In A. D. M , Jabalpur v. S. Sukla, 2 popularly known as the habeas corpus v 
case the question as to what is the true scope and content of the right con- 
ferred by Article 2 1 was again raised before the Supreme Court. The facts of 
the case were as follows : On June 25, 1975, the President issued a Proclama- 
tion uoder Article 352 (1) declaring that a grave emergency existed whereby 
the security of India was threatened by internal disturbance. On November 
16, 1976 the President issued an Order under Art. 359 (1) and suspended the 
right to move any court for the cnforcemcnt'of the rights conferred by Articles 
14, 21 and 22 of the Constitution. The petitioners were detained under section 
3 of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971 (a preventive detention 
law). They filed writ-petitions in different High Courts for the issue of the 
writ of habeas corpus. The Government raised a preliminary objection to 
their maintainability on the ground that in view of the Presidential order their 
petitions were not maintainable. The High Courts, however, rejected the 
preliminary objection for one reason or another. The State appealed to the 
Supreme Court, 

It was contended on behalf of the detenues that the object of the Presi- 
dential Order was to bar the Supreme Court under Art. 32 for the enforce- 
ment of certain suspended rights without effecting in any manner the enforce- 
ment of Common law and statutory right to personal liberty under Art. 226 
before the High Courts. In other words, the question was whether Art. 21 
is the sole repository of the right to personal liberty. The detenoes contended 
that the right to life and personal liberty is not only guaranteed by Art. 

21 but are also protected under Common law and statutory law. The right to 
personal liberty is contained in Articles 19, 20, 22 and therefore. Art. 21 is not 
the sole repository to personal liberty. It was argued that personal liberty is 
not a congomcration of positive rights but is merely a negative concept denot- 
ing an area of free action and does not confer any right and hence is outside 
the scope and ambit of Art. 359 (1) and consequently outside the Presidential 
order. 

The Supreme Court, however, rejected these contentions of the respon- 
dents and held that Article 21 is the sole repository of rights to life and 

1. AIR 1978 SC 594. 

1 AIR 1976 SC 1207, 



PROTECTION OF LIFE AND PERSONAL LIBERTY 


151 


H] 


personal liberty against the State. It embraces all aspects of personal liberty. 
The right to personal liberty is neither a Common law right nor a statutory 
right nor a natural right. The effect of suspension of enforcement of Art. 21 
by the Presidential Order is that no one can move any court for enforcement of 
the right conferred by Art. 21, while the Presidential Order is in operation. 

Khanna, J., however, delivered a dissenting judgment. He held that Art. 
21 is not the sole repository of the right to life and personal liberty. Even in 
absence of Art. 21 in the Constitution, the State has got no power to deprive 
a person of his life or personal liberty without the authority of law. That is 
the essential postulate and basic assumption of the rule of law in every civilised 
society. According to the law in force in India before the coming into force 
of the Constitution no one could be deprived of his life or personal liberty 
without the authority of law. Such a law continued to be in force after 
the coming into force of the Constitution in view of Art. 372 of the Constitu- 
tion. 

Prior to this case, the Supreme Court had held that notwithstanding (be 
suspension of Art. 21 the detenue could challenge the validity of his detention 
order on the ground that the order was without authority of law or in excess of 
authority or mala fide or based on extraneous considerations. 1 

The above view has been overruled io the habeas carpus case and It has 
been held that when Art. 21 is suspended no person has any locus standi (legal 
right) to move for the writ of habeas corpus under Ait. 226 before High Court 
or under Art. 32 before the Supreme Court challenging the legality of an 
order of detention on the ground that the order is not under or in compliance 
with the Act or is illegal or is vitiated by mala fide or based on extraneous 
considerations. 

44tb Amendment and Art. 21. 

Tbe 44th Amendment has amended Art. 359 which now provides that the 
enforcement of the right to life and liberty can not be suspended by the Presi- 
dential Order. This amendment is intended to prevent the reoccurrence of the 
situation in future which arose in tbe habeas corpus case. 


Makbsn Siogh v State of Punjab, AIR 1964 SC 331. 



150 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA (Chap. 

general sense embodying the principles of natural justice as interpreted by 
the U. S. Supreme Court. 

The present view. — In Maneka Gandhi's case, 1 the Supreme Court has held 
that the word ‘law’ in Art. 21 does not mean merely an enacted piece of law 
but a reasonable law, i. e., which embodies the principles of natural justice. 

Emergency and Art. 21. — The Constitution provides for the suspension of 
the rights guaranteed by Art. 21 during emergency. Article 359 empowers the 
President to suspend the right to move any court for the enforcement of such 
of the rights conferred by Part III as may be mentioned in the Presidential 
order, when the Proclamation of Emergency is made under Art. 352 by the 
President. 

For the first time, Art. 21 was suspended during the Emergency arising 
out of the Chinese attack in 1962. In 1971 it was suspended for the second 
time when Pakistan attacked India. In 1976 this Article was again suspended 
when Indira Gandhi’s Government declared emergency on the ground of 
internal disturbance. 

■J In A. D. M., Jabalpur v. S. Sukla , 2 popularly known as the habeas corpus ■ 
case the question as to what is the true scope and content of the right con- 
ferred by Article 21 was again raised before the Supreme Court. The facts of 
the case were as follows : On June 25, 1975, the President issued a Proclama- 
tion under Article 352 (1) declaring that a grave emergency existed whereby 
the security of India was threatened by internal disturbance. On November 
16, 1976 the President issued an Order under Art. 359 (1) and suspended the 
right to “ove any court for the enforcement'of the rights conferred by Articles 
14, 21 and 22 of the Constitution. The petitioners were detained under section 
3 of th e Mainten a°cc of Internal Security Act, 1971 (a preventive detention 
law). They filed writ-petitions in different High Courts for the issue of the 
writ of habeas corpus. The Government raised a preliminary objection to 
their maintainability on the ground that in view of the Presidential order their 
petitions were .not maintainable. The High Courts, however, rejected the 
preliminary objection for one reason or another. The State appealed to the 
Supreme Court, 

_ It was contended on behalf of the detenues that the object of the Presi- 
dential Order was to bar the Supreme Court under Art. 32 for the enforce- 
ment of certain suspended rights without effecting in any manner the enforce- 
ment of Common law and statutory right to personal liberty under Art. 226 
before the High Courts. In other words, the question was whether Art. 21 
is the sole repository of the right to personal liberty. The detenues contended 
that the right to life and personal liberty is not ody guaranteed by Art. 

21 but are also protected under Common law and statutory law. TTie right to 
personal liberty is contained in Articles 19, 20, 22 and therefore. Art. 21 is not 
the sole repository to personal liberty. It was argued that persooal liberty is 
not a congomeration of positive rights but is merely a negative concept denot- 
ing an area of free action and does not confer any right and hence is outside 
the scope and ambit of Art. 359 (1) and consequently outside the Presidential 
order. 

The Supreme Court, however, rejected these contentions of the respon- 
dents and held that Article 21 is the sole repository of rights to life and 


1. AIR 1978 SC 594. 

?. AIR 1976 SC 1207, 



1 1] PROTECTION OP LIFE AND PERSONAL LIBERTY 151 

personal liberty against the Slate. It embraces all aspects of personal liberty. 
The right to personal liberty is neither a Common law right nor a statutory 
right nor a natural right. The effect of suspension of enforcement of Art. 21 
by the Presidential Order is that no one can move any court for enforcement of 
the right conferred by Art. 21, while the Presidential Order is in operation. 

Khanna, J., however, delivered a dissenting judgment. He held that Art. 
21 is not the sole repository of the right to life and personal liberty. Even in 
absence of Art. 21 in the Constitution, the State has got no power to deprive 
a person of his life or personal liberty without the authority of law. That is 
the essential postulate and basic assumption of the rule of law in every civilised 
society. According to the law in force in India before the coming into force 
of the Constitution no one could be deprived of his life or personal liberty 
without the authority of Jaw. Such a law continued to be in force after 
the coming into force of the Constitution in view of Art. 372 of the Constitu- 
tion. 

Prior to this case, the Supreme Court had held that notwithstanding the 
suspension of Art. 21 the detenue could challenge the validity of his detention 
order on the ground that the order was without authority of law or in excess of 
authority or mala fide or based on extraneous considerations. 1 

The above view has been overruled in the habeas corpus case and it has 
been held that when Art. 21 is suspended no person has any locus standi (legal 
right) to move for the writ of habeas corpus under Ait. 226 before High Court 
or under Art. 32 before the Supreme Court challenging the legality of an 
order of detention on the ground that the order is not under or in compliance 
with the Act or is illegal or is vitiated by mala fide or based on extraneous 
considerations. 

44lh Amendment and Art. 21. 

The 44th Amendment has amended Art. 359 which now provides that the 
enforcement of the right to life and liberty can not be suspended by the Presi- 
dential Order. This amendment is intended to prevent the reoccurrence of the 
situation in future which arose in the habeas corpus case. 


1. Makban Singh v. Slate of Punjab, AIR 1964 SC 331. 



12 

Safeguards against Arbitrary 
Arrest and. Detention (Art. 22) 

Introduction.— According to Article 21 no person can be deprived of his 
life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law. This 
means that a person can be deprived of his life or personal liberty provided his 
deprivation was brought about in accordance with the procedure prescribed by 
law. It was held in Gopalan's case 1 that this article gave the Legislature full 
authority to make law and prescribe any procedure it liked. Article 22 
provides those procedural requirements which must be adopted and included 
in any procedure enacted by the Legislature. If these procedural requirements 
are not complied with it would then be deprivation of personal liberty which is 
not in accordance with the procedure established by law. Thus Article 22 
prescribes the minimum procedural requirements that must be included in any 
law enacted by the Legislature in accordance with which a person may be 
deprived of his life and personal liberty. Kania, J. in Gopalan's case 2 has stated 
that Article 21 has to be read as supplemented by Article 22. Article 22 deals 
with two separate matters (1) persons arrested under the ordinary law of crimes, 
and (2) persons detained under the law of 'Preventive Detention’. The first two 
clauses of Article 22 deal with detention under the ordinary law of crimes and 
lay down the procedure which has to be followed when a man is arrested -and 
tbe remaining {clauses 3, 4, 5, 6) deal with the detention under Preventive 
Detention and lay down the procedure which is to be followed when a person is 
detained under that law. 

Art. 22 not a complete Code.— At one time it was thought that Art. 22 
was a complete Code in regard to laws providing for preventive detention 
and that the validity of an order of detention should be determined 
strictly according to the terms and within the four corners of 
Art. 22. It was held 'in Gopalan's case' that a detenue may not claim 
that tbe freedoms guaranteed by Art. 19 (1) (dj was infringed by 
his detention, and that the validity ot the preventive detention law was not to 
be tested in the light of the reasonableness of the restrictions imposed thereby 
on the freedom of movement, nor on the ground that his right to personal 
liberty was infringed otherwise than according to procedure established by law. 

. This view has now been shown to be wrong in R. C. Cooper v. Union of India. 
Although the case is concerned with Art. 31 (2) but now in Maneka Gandhi's 
case the Court has applied it in relation to Art. 21 also. According to this 
view a law relating to preventive detention must now satisfy requirement of 
both Arts. 19 and 22. In other words, the validity of a preventive detention 
law will also be tested on the ground that it imposes ‘reasonable restriction* 
under Art. 19. 

Clauses (1) and (2). 

Clauses (1) and (2) of Article 22, guarantee four rights, to the persons who 
are arrested under an ordinary law — 

1. Mohd. Yousuf v. State of J. & K., AIR 1979 SC 1923. 

2. AIR 1950 SC 27. 



SAFEGUARDS AGAINST ARDURARY ARREST AND DETENTION 


153 


12 ) • 


(a) the right to be informed ‘as soon as may be’ of ground of arrest, 

(b) the right to consult and to be represented by a lawyer of his own 

choice, . 

(c) the right to be produced before a Magistrate within 24 hours, 

(d) the freedom from detention beyond the said period except by the 

order of the Magistrate. / 

The above four fundamental rights guaranteed to arrested persons by 
clauses (1) and (2) of Article 22 are available to both citizens and non-citizens 
and to persons arrested aDd detained under any Jaw providing for preventive 
detention. 

. . (a) The rights to be informed of grounds of arrest.— This is necessary to 
enable the arrested person to know the grounds of his arrest and to prepare for 
his defence. Article 22 is in the nature of a directive to the arresting autho- 
rities to disclose the grounds or arrest of a person immediately. The words used 
in Afticle 22 (1) are ‘as soon as may be' which mean ‘as nearly as is reasonable 
in the circumstances of a particular case. 1 If the grounds of arrest is delayed 
it must be justified by ‘reasonable circumstances’. This right of being informed 
of the grounds of arrest is not dispensed with by offering to take bail to the 
arrested person.* 

\ (b) Right to be defended by a lawyer of his own choice.— In America, if a 

person is arrested he roust be afforded opportunity to consult lawyer of hfd 
own choice and if he is unable to employ a counsel it is the duty of the court 
to employ a lawyer for him.’ fn Tndia however, the court is not bound to 
employ a lawyer unless a request is made by him. 

In Hussainara Khatoon v. State oj Bihar* the Supreme Court has held 
that it is the constitutional right of every accused person who is unable to 
engage a lawyer and secure legal services on account of reasons such as pro* 
verty, indigence or incommunicade situation, to have free legal services 
proved to him by the State and the State is under constitutional duty to provide 
a lawyer to such person if the needs of justice so require. If free legal 
services are not provided the trial itself may be vitiated as contravening Art. 21. 

In State of M. P. v. Shobharam? the respondent was arrested without 
warrant on a charge of criminal trespass under section 447, I. P. C. He was 
released on bail. His trial was held in the court of Nyaya Panchayat which 
sentenced him to a fine of Rs. 75. He was not permitted at the trial to be 
defended by a lawyer, because under the Madhya Pradesh Panchayat Act no 
lawyer could appear before a Nyaya Panchayat. The Supreme Court agreed 
with the reasoniog of tbe M. P.. High Court and held that tbe trial was not 
legal and declared the relevant provisions of M. P. Panchayat Act unconsti- 
tutional for being violative of Article 22 (l). However, in Ram Swamp v. 
Union of India * it was held that there was no denial of the right guaranteed 
to the accused where he did not make a request to the court for engaging a 
lawyer of his own choice to defend him. 

The protection of this Article is also not available to a person who has 
been convicted by a competent court and detained.* • ' 

1. Tarapada v. State of West Bengal, AIR I9Jt SC 174. 

2. State of M. P. v. Shobharam, AIR 1966 SC 1910. 

3. Powell v. A I turns, 247 VS 45. , 

4. AIR 1979 SC 1377. 

5. AIR 1966 SC 1910 ; K. N. Sarkar v. State, 1968 Cr. U 121. 

6. AIR 1965 SC 217. 

7. Kesbav Singh v. The Speaker of U. P. Assembly, AIR 1965 All. 149. 

Const. 20 



154 


Constitutional law op india 


(Chap: 


(c) Fight to he produced before a Magistrate.— In addition to the furnish- 
ing of the grounds of arrest the arrested person roust be produced before the 
Magistrate within 24 hours of his arrest It can be extended beyond 24 hours 
only under the judicial custody. It affords a possibility if not an opportunity 
for immediate release in case the arrest is not justified. 

(d) No detention beyond 24 hours except by order of the Magistrate. — This 
means that if there is necessity of detention beyond 24 hours it is only possible 
under judicial custody. 

The expression “arrest and detention” in Article 22 (1) and (2) was held 
not to appiy to a person arrested under a warrant issued by the court on a 
criminal or quasi-criminal complaint or under security proceedings. Article 
22 is designed to give protection against the act of the Executive or other non- 
judiciai authorities and applies to a person who has been accused of a crime or 
of offence of criminal or quasi-criminal nature or some act prejudicial to the 
State or public interest. In State of Punjab v. Ajalb Singh, 1 2 3 the Supreme Court 
held valid the Abducted Persons (Recovery and Restoration) Act, 1949, under 
which an abducted person was arrested and delivered to the officer in charge of 
the nearest Camp. The arrest of an abducted person under the Act was held 
not to constitute “arrest and detention’’ because the person was not accused 
of any offence of a criminal or quasi-criminal nature. Likewise, the removal 
of a minor girl from a brothel under the Bengal Suppression of Immoral 
Traffic Act, 1923, was held not to constitute ‘arrest and detention’ under Article 
22.® The reason is that person who is arrested under a warrant of a court is 
informed of the grounds of his arrest. 

Exceptions to Cls. (I) and (2). 

Clause (3) of Art. 22 provides two exceptions to the rule contained in 
clauses ( 1 ) and (2). It says that the rights given to arrested persons under 
clauses (1) aDd (2) ate not available to the following persons : 

1. An enemy alien. 

2. A person arrested and detained under a preventive detention law. 

An enemy alien may, however, seek the protection under clauses (4) and 

(5) of Art. 22 if arrested under a law of Preventive Detention, but subject to 
the law passed by the Parliament. 

PREVENTIVE DETENTION LAWS 

Clauses (4) to (7) of Art. 22 provide the procedure which is to be follow-, 
ed if a person is arrested under the law of Preventive Detention. There is no 
authoritative definition of the term ’Preventive Detention’ in Indian law. The 
word ‘preventive’ is used in coutra-distinction to the word ‘punitive*. It is not 
a punitive but a preventive measure. While the object of the punitive detention 
is to punish a person for what he has already done, the object of preventive' 
detention is not to punish a man for having done something but to intercept 
him before he does it and to prevent him from doing it. No offence is proved, 
nor any charge is formulated. The sole justification of such detention is suspi- 
cion or reasonable probability of the detenue committing some act likely to 
cause barm to the society or endanger the security of the Government, and not 
criminal conviction which can only be warranted by legal evidence.® 

1. AIR 1953 SC 10. 

2. Raj Bahadur Singb v. Legal Remembrancer, AIR 1955 Cal. 522. 

3. A. K. Gcpalan y. State of Madras. AIR 1950 SC 27 at p. 91 (Mukherjee, J.J. 



12 ] 


SAFEGUARDS AGAINST ARBITRARY ARREST AND DETENTION 


155 


Necessity of such provision.— Preventive detention laws are repugnant to 
democratic Constitution and they are not found in any of the democratic 
countries of the world. No country in the world has made these laws integral 
part of the Constitution as has been done in India. There is no such law in U. 
S. A. It was resorted to in England only during war time. In England for the 
first time during the First World War certain regulations framed under the 
Defence of Realm Act provided for preventive detention at the satisfaction of 
Home Secretary as a war measure and they ceased to have effect at the conclu- 
sion of hostilities. The same thing happened during the Second World War. 
These regulations were upheld by British Courts.* Indian Constitution, how- 
ever, recognises preventive detention in normal timet also. In A. K. Gopalan v. 
State of Madras , a Patanjali Shastri, J., explaining the necessity of this provision 
said, “The sinister looking feature, so strangely out of place in democratic 
Constitution, which invests personal liberty with the sacrosanctity of a funda- 
mental right and incompatible with the provisions of its preamble, is doubtless, 
designed to prevent the abuse of freedom by antisocial and subversive element 
which might imperil the national welfare of the infant republic.” 

The Preventive Detention Act, 1950. — The Preventive Detention Act was 
enacted by the Parliament on 26th February, 1950. The object of the Act was 
to provide for detention with a view to prevent any person from acting in a 
manner prejudicial to the defence of India, the relation of India with foreign 
powers the Security of India or a State or the maintenance of public order, 
the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community. The 
main provisions of the Act were contained in Sfccs. 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 
14. Section 3 empowered the Central and the State Governments and certain 
officers under them to make orders of detention if they were satisfied that it 
was necessary to detain a person with a view to prevent him from acting in any 
manner prejudicial to the things mentioned above. Thus the order of deten- 
tion could be made on the subjective satisfaction of the Executive. When the ' 
order of detention was made by any subordinate officer he was to report the 
fact to the State Government together with grounds on which the order of de- 
tention was made and such other particulars which in his opinion was necessary 
to make detention order. Section 7 directs the detaining authority to commu- 
nicate the grounds of detention to the detenue without delay and to afford him 
the earlier opportunity to make representation against the order. However, 
the authority was not bound to disclose facts which in his opinion was against 
the public interest. Section 8 provides for the constitution of the Advisory 
Boards. Section 9 directs the appropriate Government, within 6 w«ks from 
the detention order, to place before the Advisory Board the grounds of order 
of detention and any representation made by the detenue for its opinion. 
Section 10 lays down the procedure to be followed by the Advisory Board. It 
requires the Advisory Board to consider the material before it and submit 
report to the appropriate Government within 10 weeks from the date of deten- 
tion order, whether or not there is sufficient reason for the detention of the 
detenbe. If the Advisory Board reports that the detention is justified the 
Government may confirm the detention order and continue the detention for 
such period as it thinks fit. Section 12 provides detention for a longer period 
than 3 months without consulting the Advisory Board. - Such period, however, 
cannot exceed more than one year. An order of detention could be revoked 
or modified at any time before the expiry of the period of detention. The 

1. See Liverside v. Anderson, (I W) AC 206 ; Rex v. Holiday. (1917) AC 260. (Held, 

personnal liberty can be sacrificed for the national success in war) 

7. AIR 1950 SC 27- 



156 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA ' 


[Chap. 


revocation shall not be a bar to the making of fresb detention order. Section 
14 barred the jurisdiction of the court to look into the question whether 
grounds are supplied to the detenuc or not. The section was declared to be 
unconstitutional in Gopalan's case. 1 2 

The Act was purely a temporary measure and was to cease to have effect 
on 1st April, 1951. .But its life was extended from time to time till it lapsed on 
December 31, 1969. The Preventive Detention Law was revived jn the form 
of Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971, in less than two years time 
after the lapse of the first Preventive Detention Act, 1950 This Act continued 
to be in operation upto the year 1977. When the Congress Government 
headed by Smt. Indira GaDdbi was defeated in the Lok Sabba elections the.^ct 
was repealed by the Janata Government, on 3rd August, 1978.' , 

But in less than two years time after the repeal of the MfSA the Care- 
taker Government headed by Mr. Charan Singh again revived the preventive 
detention law in the form of Prevention of Black-marketing and .Maintenance 
of Supplies of Essential Commodities Ordinance. 1979. The ordinance has now 
been replaced by an Act. It provides for preventive detention for preventing 
black marketing and • boarding* of essential commodities: 11 It requires the 
detaining authority to furnish grounds of detention within a period of 5 days 
from the date of detention.'extendable to 10 days in exceptional cases. Within 
3 weeks the Government is required to place grounds of detention along with 
delenues’ representations before the Advisory Board. The Board must submit 
its report to the Government within ,7 weeks from the date of detention. • The 
maximum period for which a person could be detained after the confirmation 
by the Advisory Board has been restricted to’ 6 months from the date of 
detention. The aggrieved {person will have the right to move the courts under 
Art. 32 and 226 of the Constitution. 

Constitutional Safeguards against Preventive Detention Laws.— Though 
the Constitution has recognised the necessity of laws as to preventive detention, 
it has also provided safeguards to mitigate their harshness by placing fetters 
on legislative power conferred on the Legislature. The power of preventive 
detention is acquiesced in by the Constitution as a necessary evil and therefore 
hedged in by diverse procedural safeguards to minimise as much as possible the 
danger of its misuse. It is for this reason that Ankle 22 has been given a 
place in the Chapter on “guaranteed rights’’.* Clauses (4) to (7) guarantee the 
following safeguards to a person arrested under preventive detention law : 

(a) Review by Advisory Board ; , . . ' , 

(b) Grounds of Detention and Representation ; 

(c) Composition and Procedure of Advisory Board. 

(a) Review by Advisory Board.— Clause (4) of Art. 22 has now been 
amended by the Constitution (44th Amendment) Act, 1978. The effect of the 
Amendment has been discussed below : _ 

Position Prior to 44th Amendment Act, 1978.— Clause (4) provided that • 
no law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the detention of a 
person for a longer period than * three months' unless an Advisory Board consti- 
tuted of persons who are or have been or qualified to be High Court Judges 
has reported before the expiration of the said period of three months that 
there is in its opinion sufficient cause for such detention. If in the opinion of 

1, AIR 1950 SC 27/ 

2. Fuokaj Kumar v. Stale of West Bengal, AIR 1970 SC 97, 



12) 


SAFEGUARDS AGAINST ARBITRARY ARREST AND DETENTION 


1 


Advisory Board the detention was not justified the Government was bound 
revoke the detention order. 1 * * * 5 If the Advisory Board reports that the detenti* 
is justified then the detaining authority will determine the period of detentic 
However, the period of detention cannot be indefinite. Clause (4) (b) says th 
the detention cannot exceed in any case beyond the maximum period prescri 
cd by any Jaw made by Parliament for that class of deteaue under sub-clan 
(b) of clause (7). Any law providing for detention for a longer period of 
months without obtaining the opinion of the Advisory Board must provii 
; the class or classes of cases and also the circumstances under which a perse 
may be detained for more than 3 months. It means that the Parliament mu 
provide both (a) the classes of cases, and (b) the circumstances under whit 
detention for a longer period of 3 months can be made.® It is, therefore, 
crucial requirement of Article 22 (4) that the appropriate Government has i 
take action on the report of the Board, because on that action would depen 
the revocation of the order and bis releaseor the continuance of the detentic 
beyond 3 months. • It would, therefore, prima facie, appear that action shou! 
be taken immediately after the receipt of the opinion of the Board or at ar 
rate within 3 months from the day of detention. If the order of detention 
not confirmed within 3 months from the date of the detention further detentio 
of deteaue after the expiry of 3 months will be without the authority of la 
and hence will make the detention illegal. Any subsequent action by tfc 
appropriate Government after three months cannot have the affect of extendin 
the period of detention. 8 

In S. N. Sarkar v. Union of India* the validity of section 17A of th 
Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971, was involved. This Act was passe 
in 1971 with a view to cope with the special situation created by the refuge 
influx from East Bengal, now Bangladesh. It contains more stringent provision 
against certain type of foreigners entering the country as spies with the inten 
tion of undermining the security of the State. The Preventive Detention Lavs 
which was allowed to lapse on December 31, 1969, provided for a maximuc 
detention period of one year. The present Act provides for a period of deten 
lion for 2 years without consulting an Advisory Board as required by Artie] 
22 (4) of the Constitution. In that case, the petitioner Shambhu Nath Sarka 
was detained under section 17-A of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act 
The petitioner challenged the validity of section 17-A on the ground that I 
violated his fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 22 (7) of the Constitutior 
The Supreme Court held that section 17-A of the Act providing for detention fo 
a period longer than 3 months without obtaining the opinion of the Advisor; 
Board was unconstitutional because it did not satisfy the requirements lair 
down in Art. 22 (7) of the Constitution. -Under danse (7) the Parliament »: 
empowered in special cases to enact a law providing preventive detention fo: 
more than 3 months without the opinion of the Advisory Board provided i 
simultaneously defines the circumstances as well as the cases or classes of case 
in which such a law would apply. . . . ' 

The Court also overruled the majority view in the A. K. Gopahn's case, 1 
VS 2 . that a law made by a Parliament providing detention for a period longei 


I. Shibban Ul v. State of V V 

0 r N Sarkar v. Union of India, AIR No SC 1425. 

s’ Nirtriao Kumar v. Union or India, AIR NTS SC 1 155 (a case under COFFPQSA) : 
' nTs™, State of W B., AIR 1972 SC 1924 ,-Sfealjo Madaa MalicJr r. Slate c: 
w R AIR ’l?/2 SC 1S7S ; AU Mohan v. State orW.B, AIR 1972 SC 1455 ; & 
Mnuieriee v State ot W. B-, AIR 1972 SC 1356. In all these eases the validity of sec- 
tions 1 2& 13 of W. B. (Preveotton of Violent Activities) Act, 1970 was questioned, 

4 AIR 1973 SC J 425. 

5. AIR 1950 SC 27. 


158 coNSimmoNAL law of jndia [Chap. 

than 3 months could specify either the circumstances or alternatively the cases 
or classes of cases to which such law would apply. 

But even when the Advisory Board reports that the detention is justified 
it cannot continue the detention for indefinite period because according to 
clause (4) (b) it cannot exceed in any case beyond the maximum period 
prescribed by a law of Parliament for that class of detenue. i 

Clause (7) of Article 22, embodies an exception to clause (4). It empowers 
Parliament only, not the State legislature, to enact a law by which a person 
may be detained for more then three months without the opinion of an 
Advisory Board. But such a law must firstly provide for the class or classes 
of cases and the circumstances under which a person may be detained fora 
longer period then 3 months, and secondly, it must also lay down the maxi- 
mum period for which any person in any class or classes of cases be detained. 
It means that in all cases of preventive detention exceeding three months, if the 
detenue under Parliamentary Legislation is denied the benefit of the investiga- 
tion of his case by the Advisory Board the period for which a detenue of that 
class can be kept in custody must always be specified by the law. 

Thus the opinion of the Advisory Board was not necessary in two cases— 
(1) when the period of detention does not exceed three months (after 44th 
Amendment, 1978 only two months) and (2) when Parliament by a law pres- 
cribes the maximum period for which a person may be detained under Cl. (4) 
(V) and Cl. (7) (a) (b).-[de'.eted). 

Position After the 44th Amendment Act, 1978.— The 44th Amendment 
Act, 1978, has amended clauses (4) and (7) of Art. 22. The newly substituted 
clause (4) now reduces f the maximum period for which a person may be 
detained without obtaining the opinion of the Advisory Board from 3 months 
(in unamended article) to *2 months'. The detention of a person for a longer 
period than two months can only be made after obtaining the opinion of the 
Advisory Board. 

The Amendment has changed the composition of the Advisory 
Board. The Advisory Board shall be constituted in accordance with the 
recommendation of the Chief Justice of the appropriate High Court. It shall 
consist of a Chairman and not less than two other .members. The Chairman 
of an Advisory Board shall be a sitting Judge of the appropriate High Court 
and the other members shall be sitting or retired Judges of any High Court. 
Thus an Advisory Board as envisaged under the Amendment Act of 1978 shall 
dow be an independent and impartial body i. e„ free from executive control. 

The Amendment abolishes, the provision for preventive detention with- 
out reference to an Advisory Board as provided' in unamended sub-clause (a) 
of clause (7) of Art. 22. The amendment therefore deletes sub-clause (a) of 
^clause (7) of Art. 22. Under Art. 22(7) (a) Parliament was empowered to 
make law for preventive detention without obtaining the opinion of an 
Advisory Board beyond the period of three months. After the 44th Amend- 
ment a person can be detained beyond the period of two months only after 
obtaining the opinion of an Advisory Board. This deletion of clause (a) of 
Art. 22 (7) has thus removed the greatest blot on preventive detention ia India. 1 

(h) Grounds of detention must be eomnnmicated to the detenne. — Article 
22 (5) gives two rights to the detenue ; (a) the authority making the order of 
detention must "as soon as may be” communicate to the person detained the 
grounds of his arrest, that is, the grounds which led to the subjective satisfac- 

1. Seervai Constitutional Law of India, 11 ed.. Ill VoL, page 1899. 



12j '• *’ 


SAFEGUARDS AGAINST ARBITRARY ARREST AND DETENTION 


155 


tion ' of the detaining authority, and (b) to give the detenue “the earliest 
opportunity” of making a representation against the order of detention, that 
is, to be furnished with sufficient particulars to enable him to make a 
representation. 

Thus clause (5) imposes an obligation on the detaining authority to 
furnish to the detenue the grounds for detention “as soon as possible”. The 
grounds of detention should be very clear and easily understandable by the 
detenue. The sufficiency of the particulars conveyed to a detenue is a justici- 
able issue, the test being whether they are sufficient To enable the detenue to 
make an effective representation. Thus where the detenue did not know 
sufficient English to understand the grounds communicated to him, it was 
held that there was no sufficient compliance with the requirements laid down 
in the Constitution. 1 2 3 4 The grounds of detention must be in existence at the 
time of making the order. No part of such ground can be held back nor 
can new ground be added thereto. 8 

In Shibban Lai v. State of U. P., s the petitioner had been supplied with 
two grounds of his detention. But later on the detaining authority revoked 
one of the grounds communicated to him earlier. The detenue challenged the 
detention as illegal. The State contended that the remaining ground was 
sufficient to sustain the detention. The Court held the detention illegal and 
observed, “To say that the other ground, which still remains, is quite suffi- 
cient to sustain the order would be substituted on objective judicial test for 
the subjective decisions of the executive authority which is against the legis- 
lative policy underlying the statute. In such cases, we think, the position 
would be the same as if one of these grounds was irrelevant for purposes of 
the Act or was wholly illusory and this would vitiate the detention order “as a 
whole". 

In Kishori Mohan v. State of TV. B,* the petitioner was detained under 
section 3 of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971, “with a view to 
prevent his acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of the public 
order or secuiity to the Stale.” The grounds of detention supplied to the 
petitioner were as follows 

( 1 ) that you along with your associates held a meeting at a place and 
decided to kill Jotedars and richmen of the locality ; 

(2) that you along with your associates attacked S. K. Ismail and tried 
to assault him by the tango and dagger wilh intent to kill him ; 

, (3) that you and your associates addressed a meeting and impressed 
upon the gathering to use arson to establish common Raj in the country' and 
for the same purpose urged killing policemen and collect guns and arms and 
ammunition from them, etc. 

The Court said that the detention order stating that the detention was 
necessary to prevent the detenue from acting in a manner prejudicial to the 
“maintenance of pupVic order or security of State" shows that either the 
magistrate was Dot certain whether the activities of the detenue endangered 
public order or security of the State or that he merely reproduced mechanically 
the language of section 3 of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act. 
The Court held that when such equivocal language is used in an order 
and the detenue is not told whether his alleged activities set out in grounds of 

1. Hart Ktrshna v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1962 SC 911. 

2. State of Bombay v. Alma Ram, A1RI9S4 SC 157. 

3. AIR 1954 SC 179 • see also Desrits Prasad v. State of Bihar, AIR 1972 SC 134. 

4. AIR 1972 SC 1749 



160 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap.' 


detention fall under one head or the other or both, it is not difficult to appre- 
ciate that a detenue might find it hard to make an adequate representation 
to the Government and the Advisory Board. The inclusion of an extraneous 
ground of detention vitiates the detention order since it is impossible to pre- 
dicate whether without it the requisite satisfaction by the authority making 
the order could have been reached. The ground No. (2) was clearly extra- 
neous to any of the heads and therefore the detention was invaild. 

The grounds supplied to the detenue roust not be * vague ’ or * irrelevant ’ 
or non-existent. If the grounds are vague or irrelevant to the object of the 
legislation the right of detenue under clause (5) is violated. A ground is said 
to be irrelevant when it has no connection with the satisfaction of the autho- 
rity making the order of detention. The inclusion of an irrelevant or non- 
existent ground among other relevant grounds is an infringement of the 
rights of ft detenue. The inclusion of even a single irielavant or obscure 
grounds is an invasion of the detenue’s constitutional right because it pre- 
cludes the court from adjudicating upon the sufficiency of the grounds. 1 

In Ram Bahadur v. State of Bihar , a it has been held that where the order 
of detention is founded on distinct and separate grounds, if any of the grounds 
is vague or irrelevant the entire order must fail. In Fogle & S. K. Jalil v. State 
of Bengal * where one of the reasons for detention was not communicated to 
the detenue, the Court held that the detenue had no opportunity to make an 
effective representation to the Government and therefore the detention is 
violative of Art. 22 ( 5) and must be set aside. i 

(c) Right of Representation.— The other right given to the detenue is 
that he should be given the earliest opportunity of making a representation 
against the detention order. It means that the detenue must be furnished 
with sufficient particulars of the grounds of his detention to enable him to 
make a representation which on being considered may give him relief. 4 - 

The ‘grounds’ under Art. • 22 (5) mean all the basic facts and materials 
which have been taken into account by the detaining authority in making the 
order of detention and on which, therefore, the order of detention is based. 
Nothing less than all the basic facts and materials which influenced the detain- 
ing authority in making the otder of detention must be communicated to the 
detenue. This is the plain requirement of the first safeguard in Article 22 (5). 
The second safeguard in Article 22 (5) requires that the detenue shall be 
afforded the earliest opportunity of making representation against the order 
of detention. No avoidable delay, no shortfall in the materials communicated 
shall stand in the way of the detenue in making an earlier, yet comprehensive 
and effective representation in regard to all basic facts and materials which 
may have influenced the detaining authority in making the order of detention 
depriving him of his freedom. These are the legal safeguards enacted by the 
Constitution-makers against arbitrary or improper exercise of the vast powers 
of preventive detention which may be vested in the Executive by a Jaw of 
preventive detention such as the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 
1971 .• 

The reason why grounds are required to he communicated ‘as soon as 
possible’ is two-fold. Firstly, it acts as a check against arbitrary and capri- 
cious exercise of power. The detaining authority cannot whisk away a person 

1. Mohd. Yousuf V. State of J. & K., AIR. 1979 SC 1923. 

2. AIR 1975 SC 22J. 

3. AIR 1975 SC 245. 

4. Lawrence D’Soum v. Bombay State, AIR 1956 SC 531. Also see Mobd. Yousuf v. 

State of J & K , AIR 1979 SC 1925. 

5. Khudiram Das v. State of W. B., AIR 1975 SC 550. 



121 


SAFEGUARDS AGAINST ARBITRARY ARREST AND DETENTION 


161 


and put him behind bars at its own sweet will. It must have grounds for 
doing so. Secondly, the detenue has to be afforded an opportunity of making 
a representation against the order of detention. But if the grounds arc not 
supplied to him it is not possible for him to make representation and in fact 
the right to make representation would become illusory. 


Under Article 22 (5) the Government is bound to consider the petitioner’s 
representation as expeditiously as possible. Delay in deciding detenue’s repre-' 
sentation will make the detention illegal. 1 Delay in considering the represen- 
tation of the detention must be properly explained otherwise it will make the 
detention illegal. In a case under the West Bengal (Prevention of Violent 
Activities) Act, 1970, the Supreme Court held that the unexplained delay 
of 19 days between receipt of a representation from a detenue and Government 
decision on it would render such detention illegal. The detenue had made 
his representation on July 9, 1971, but the Government kept it till 
July 27, 1971, before sending it to the Advisory Board which rejected it * 
Whether the representation has been disposed off expeditiously or 
not will be determined by the Court on the facts and circumstances of each 
case. Thus where the State Government receives detenues representation only 
one day before the expiry of 30 days from the date of hi* detention within 
which the Government has to refer his case to the Advisory Board under sec- 
tion 10 of the West Bengal (Prevention of Violent Activities) Act. 1970, 
together with his representation it is practically impossible for the State 
Government to consider the representation properly and bona fide and arrive 
at its decision thereon before it refers the case to the Advisory Board.* 


Thus the detenue has dual right to have representation considered 
bv the appropriate Government and also by Advisory Board. In 
Punkaf Kumar v. State of W. B.* the Supreme Court said, ’it is clear 
from the clauses (4) and (5) of Art. 22 that there is a dual obligation on the 
appropriate Government and a dual light in favour of the detenue, namely. (I) 
to have his representation, irrespective of the Icngh of detention, considered 
by the appropriate Government, and (2) to have once again the representation 
in the light or the circumstances of the case considered by the Board before 
it gives its opinion. If in the light of th3t representation the Board finds that 
there is no sufficient cause for detention, the Government has to revoke the 
order of detention and set the detenue at liberty. Thus whereas the Govern- 
ment considers the representation to ascertain whether the order is in confor- 
mity with its power under the relevant law, the Board considers such represen- 
tation from the point of view of arriving at its opinion whether there it suffi- 
cient cause for detention. The obligation of the appropriate Government to 
afford to the detenue the opportunity to make representation and to consider 
that representation is distinct from the Government’* obligation to consume a 
Board and to communicate the representation amongst other materials to the 
Board to enable it to form its opinion. The above conclusion is strengthened 
by the provisions of the Preventive Detention Act, 1950, made in conformity 


|. Saly* Deo Prasad v. Sute of Bihar, AIR 1 937 SC 367. 

2. Sec Northern India PaifiKa, 4th Majr, I97J. 

3. J. N. Rov v. Slats of W. IE, AIR 1977 SC 2141. 

4. AIR 1970 SC 97. 

Const. 21 



162 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap 


with clauses (4) and (5) of Art. 22. Consequently, the deteaue has a constitu- 
tional tight and there is on the Government a corresponding constitutional 
obligation to consider his representation irrespective of whether it is made be- 
fore or after his case is referred to the Advisory Board- 


Id Jayanaraln Sukul v. Slate of l Vest Bengal, 1 2 the Court held that the 
language of Art 22 (5) of the Constitution makes it obligatory of the State 
Government to consider the representation or the detenue as soon as it is 
received by it. The opinion of Advisory Board is no substitute for the con- 
sideration of the representation by the Government the Court has enunciated 
the following four principles to be followed in regard to the representation of 
the detenue : (1) The appropriate authority is bound to give an opportunity to 
tbe detenue to make representation and to consider the representation as early 
as possible. (2) The consideration of the representation of the detenue by 
the appropriate authority is entirely independent of any action by the Advisory 
Board, including the consideration of the representation by the Board, (3) 
There should not be any delay in the matter of consideration. (4) The appro- 
priate Government is to exercise its opinion and judgment on the representa- 
tion berore sending the case along with the deteniie's tepresenUtion to the 
Advisory Board. If the appropriate Government will release the detenue it 
will not send the matter to the Advisory Board. It the Government will not 
release, it will send toe case along with detenue's representation to the Board. 
If the Board reports in favour of release the Government will release. If the 
Board expresses its opinion against the representation the Government may 
still exercise the power to release the detenue. 


Thus where ihe detenue made a representation against the order of bis 
detention and the State Government without considering the representation 
confirmed the order of detention it W3$ held that the State Government failed 
in its obligation and that the confirmation of detention was in violation of 
section 7 or the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, and Art. 22 (5) of 
the Constitution and therefore invalid. The subsequent consideration and 
rejection of the representation could not cure such invalidity of the confirma- 
tion of the order of detention and consequently the detention was illegal and 
void.* 


In Balchand Chorasla v. Union of India, 3 the representation was filed by 
the detenue through bis counsel. The Government did not consider the repre- 
sentation and approved the detention on the ground that it was not filed by 
the detenue. The Court held that tbe High Court was wrong in construing 
that the representation was not made by the deteDue bimself but by his counsel. 
The lawyer had filed the representation on the instruction of th: detenue. The 
Supreme Court said that in matters wNere the liberty of the individual is 
concerned and a highly cherished right is involved the representation should 
be construed liberally and not technically so as to frustrate or defeat the 
concept of liberty which is guaranteed by Art. 21 of the Constitution. As the 
representation was not considered at all by the Government which it was 
duty bound to consider, tbe detention order is vjijatedand detenue is to be 
released forthwith. 


Conservation of Foreign Exchange, Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 
1974 and Art. 22 (5). — Parliament has also passed the COFEPOSA to provide 


1. AIR 1970 SC 675 ; sec also S. K. Sakawat v. Slale of \V. B.. AIR 1975 SC 64. 

2. S. K. Sakawat v. Stale of W. B., AIR 1975 SC 64. 

3. AIR 1973 SC 237. 



12] SAFEGUARDS AGAINST ARBITRARY ARREST AND DETENTION 163 

for preventive detention for preventing smuggling and conserving foreign 
exchange. The Constitutional safeguards embodied in Art. 22 (5) of the 
Constitution are available to a person detained under the Conservation 
of Foreign Exchange Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 
(COFEPOSA). Merely because there is no express provision in Sec. 8 (b) of 
the (COFEPOSA) Act Placing an obligation to forward the representation 
made by the detenue along with the reference to the Advisory Board, unlike 
those contained in S. 9 of the Preventive Detention Act, 1950, and S. 10 of the 
MISA 1971 it cannot be said that there is no obligation cast on the 
Government to consider the representation made by the detenue before 
forwarding it to the Advisory Board. The repeal of MISA and retention of 
the COFEPOSA does not imply that preventive detention cao be freely used 
without any power of judicial review and without any checks and balances 
against persons engaged in anti-social and economic offences. The courts 
have always viewed with disfavour the detention without trial whatever be the 
nature of offence. 1 The Court reaffirmed its view expressed in its earliar deci- 
sions that the Government is bound to consider the representation made by 
the detenue without waiting for the opinion of Advisory Board. 

Exception 

Under Article 22 (6) disclosure of facts which are considered to be 
against public interest may not be furnished to the detenue. Hence it follows 
that both the obligations to furnish particulars and the duty to consider whe- 
ther the disclosure of any facts involved therein is against public interest, are 
vested in the detaining authority, not in any other. 3 

Advisory Board— Clause (7) (c) of Article 22 gives the Parliameet power 
to prescribe the procedure to be followed by the Advisory Board in an 
inquiry under clause (4) (a). The procedure enacted by the Parliament will 
prevail over the procedure enacted by the State law. The 44th Amendment has 
changed the Composition of the Advisory Board. It shall be constituted in 
accordance with the recommendation of the Chief Justice of the appropriate 
High Court. It shall consist of a Chairman and no less than two other 
members. The Chairman of an Advisory Board must be a sitting judge of (he 
appropriate High Court and the other members may be sitting or retired 
Judges of any High Court. Thus an Advisory Board as provided by the 44th 
Amendment shall be a body free from executive control and will be an independ- 
ent and impartial body. It would thus provide a greater pretection to persons 
detained under Preventive Detention laws. 

The Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971.— The preventive detention 
law was revived in 1971 in the form of The Maintenance of the Internal Security 
Act, 1971 The Act MI3A was passed on 2 July, 1971, to provide detention for 
the purpose of maintenance of internal security. The Act was repealed by the 
Junto Government on 3rd July, 1978. 

Section 3 authorised the Central and State Governments and some execu- 
tive officers under them to exercise the power of detention. When the order 
of detention was made by subordinate officers they were required to report the 
fact to the State Government together with grounds on which the order of deten- 
tion is based and such other particulars which in his opinion was necessary to 
make detention order. Unless approved by tbe State Government, such order 


1* NiFtndra v. B. B. Gujral, AIR 1979 SC 420. 

2. Puran Lai I akbar Pal v. Union of India, AIR 1958 SC 163. 



164 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA [Chap. 

could not remain in force more than 12 days when such order was made or 
approved by the State Government, it could, within 7 days* Teport the fact to 
the Central Government together with grounds of detention and such other 
particulars which had a bearing on the necessity for the order. Section 8 
directed the detaining authority to communicate the grounds of detention to 
the detenue without delay and to afford him the earliest opportunity to make 
representation against the order. The detaining authority was, however, not 
bound to disclose facts which in his opinion was against public interest. Sec- 
tion 9 provided for the Constitution of Advisory Board. Section 10 directed the 
appropriate Government, within 30 days, to refer the case of detenue to the 
Advisory Board the grounds of detention and the representation of the detenue 
for its opinion. Section 1 1 directed the Advisory Board to give its report to 
the appropriate Governments within 10 weeks from the date of detention. Sec- 
tion 13 provided that the maximum period of detention shall be 12 months. 
Section 17 provided for detention of a foreigner without obtaining the opinion 
of the Advisory Board up to the maximum period of 2 years. Section 17-A, 
which provided for detention up to the maximum period of 2 years was declar- 
ed unconstitutional as it did not satisfy the requirements of Ail. 22 17) which 
restricted Parliament’s power of making preventive law. 

Subjective satisfaction of detaining authority. — The language used in 
section 3 of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971, makes it clear that 
the power of detention was to be exercised on the subjective satisfaction of 
the detaining authority, that with a view to prevent a person from acting in a 
prejudicial manner as provided in section 3 of the Act, it is Decessary to 
detain such person. Thus, the court would not normally examine the decision 
of the detaining authority. 1 However, the subjective satisfaction of the detain- 
ing authority is not wholly immune from judicial scrutiny. The Courts have, 
by judicial decisions, carved out an area, limited though it be, within which 
the validity of the subjective satisfaction can yet be subject to judicial scrutiny. 
The basic postulate on which the courts have proceeded is that the subjective 
satisfaction being a condition precedent for the exercise of the power conferred 
on the executive, the courts can always examine whether the requisite satisfac- 
tion is arrived at by the authority, if it is not, the condition precedent to the 
exercise of the power would not be fulfilled and the exercise of power would 
be bad. 9 

The subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority can be challenged 
on the grounds, namely, mala fide or vagueness and irrelevant or non-existent 
grounds or mechanical application of mind of detaining authority. 

The Act thus gives extraordinary powers of high potency to the executive. 
If these powers are exercised with due discretion and care it may prove to be 
an effective weapon for fighting social evils, encompassed by the statute that 
are eating into the vitals of the Dation and pose a threat to its stability. But 
if wielded casually and capriciously, the power may turn into an engine of 
oppression posing a threat to the democratic way of life itself. The need for 
utmost good faith and caution in the exercise of this power therefore cannot 
be over-emphasised. 3 

In Sr Hal Shaw v. State of West Bengal,* the petitioner was detained under 

1 . Khudiratn Das v. Stale of W. B., AIR 1957 SC 550. 

2. S N. Sarkar v. Union of India, AIR 1973 SC 1425. 

3. Bankatlal v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1975 SC 522. 

4. AIR 1975 SC 393 ; see also Abdul Gaffarv. State of West Bengal, AIR 1975 SC 
1496. 



12 } 


SAFEGUARDS AGAINST ARBtlRARV ARREST AND DETENTION 


165 


the provisions of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1975, for unlawful 
possession of railway properly. The detenue was prosecuted under the Rail- 
way Property (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1966. But the case was not proceeded 
with because according to District Magistrate, witnesses did not dare to give 
witness against detenue for fear of their lives, and therefore the case was drop- 
ped. The Supreme Court held the detention invalid. However, (he Court 
made an important observation. It said, ‘this is a typical case in which for no 
apparent reason a person who could easily be prosecuted and punished under 
the punitive law is being preventively detained. The Railway Property Act 
confers extensive powers to bring to book persons who are found in unlawful 
possession of railway property. 

However, the Courts have upheld the detention valid even on isolated 
ground's if they are so serious to effect the whole community, la Babulal v. 
State of IPest Bengal, 1 the Court upheld the detention of detenues under 
MISA valid on the ground that they were members of a gang which committed 
an organised dacoity in a running train equipped with fire-arms and putting 
innocent passengers to peril to life and property. 

Subsequently, the following amendments were made in the MISA 

(1) The Act was made applicable to smuggleis and smuggling activities, 

(2) A new section 1 6- A was added to it which forbids disclosure of 

grounds and information in the possession of the detaining authority. It says 
that “no one shall communicate the grounds of arrest” and "no person is 
entitled to the communication of such grounds.” I 

(3) A new section 18 was also inserted which provides that “no person 
(including a foreigner) detained under this Act shall have, any right to personal 
liberty by virtue of natural law or common law, if any”. 

(4) On June 26, 1976 section 16-A was again amended by an Ordinance 
which extended the period of detention from 12 months to 24 months. This 
means that the persons detained under this Act may continue in detention for 
two years. 

The Constitution (39th Amendment) Act, 1976 enacted by Parliament 
on August 10, 1975 inserted the Maintenance oflnternal Security Act, 1971, in 
the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution and thus barred the courts to examine 
the validity of the provisions of the Act. 

In habeas corpus case, 2 the constitutional validity of section 16-A of the 
MISA (Now Repealed) was challenged. It was contended on behalf of the 
detenue that it is violative of Article 226 inasmuch as it prevents the High 
Courts from exercising the jurisdiction under the Article to issue with of habeas 
corpus and examining whether the detention under the Act is based on proper 
satisfaction of executive authority or not. 

The Court by 4 : I majority (Kbanna, I. not expressing any 
opinion on the question) held that section 16-A is constitutionally 
valid. The Court held, “it is a rule of evidence and it is not open 
either to the detenue or to the Court to ask for grounds of detention.” 
Section J6-A does not affect the jurisdiction of High Courts under Art, 
226. The jurisdiction to issue writs is neither abrogated nor abridged. It is 


2.* ADNt^Jatalpurv. S. Shukla, AIR 1976 SC 1207. 



166 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA [Chap. 

a rule of evidence. Therefore, when detaining authority is bound by section 
lfrA and forbidden absolutely from disclosing grounds of arrests no question 
can arise for adverse inference against the authority that the power was 
exercised mala fide or not on subjective satisfaction. Even if a detenue makes 
out a pnma facie case that the detention was mala fide the affidavit of the 
authority will be the answer, and judicial inquiry will be closed. The Court 
cannot insist on the production of the file or bold that the case of detenue 
stands unrebutted by reason of non-disclosure of grounds of arrest. ‘To hold 
otherwise’, Ray, C. J., held, would be to induce, reckless averment of mala fides 
to force production of the file which is forbidden by law*. 

The affect of this decision is that the Court would not be empowered to 
examine the questions of mala fides of the order of detention or ultra vires 
character of the orders of detention or that the order was not passed on the 
subjective setisfaction of the detaining authority. • 

The decision of the Supreme Court overrules impliedly a vast majority 
of its earlier decisions in which it had held that it could examine the validity 
of the detention order on the ground either that the order was not passed on 
the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority or the detention was made 
mala fide or the detention was made not for the purposes of the preventive 
detention laws. 1 

It is interesting to note that section 14 of the Preventive Detention Act, 
1951 which was similar to the present section 16-A of the MISA, was declared 
unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in the case of A. K. Gopalan v. State of 
Madras, 1 on the,ground that it foreclosed the judicial inquiry of the legality of 
detention under the said Act. 


Makban v. State of Punjab, AIR 1964 SC 381. 
AIR I960 SC 27. 



13 

Right Against Exploitation 
(Arts. 23 and 24) 

Prohibition of ‘Traffic in Human Beings and Forced Labour.— Article 23 
of the Constitution prohibits traffic in human beings and begar and other 
similar forms of forced labour. The second part of this Article declares that 
any contravention of this provision shall be an offience punishable in accord- 
ance with law. Clause (2) however permits the State to impose compulsory 
services for public purposes provided that in making so it shall not make any 
discrimination on grounds only of religion, race, caste or class or any of them. 

‘Traffic in human beings, means selling and buying men and women like 
goods. The term ‘traffic in human beings’ includes slavery and immoral traffic 
in women and children for immoral or other purposes. 1 Under Article 35 of 
the Constitution Parliament is authorised to make laws for punishing acts pro- 
hibited by this Article. In pursuance to this Article Parliament has passed 
the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956, for 
punishing acts which result in traffic in human beings. 

“Begar” and ‘‘other forms of forced labour” arc prohibited by this 
Article. “Begar” means involuntary work without payment. What is prohi- 
bited by this clause is the making of a person to render service where he was 
lawfully entitled not to work or to receive remuneration for the services 
rendered by him. This clause, therefore, does not prohibit forced labour as a 
punishment for a criminal offence. The protection is not confined to “begar” 
only but also to "other forms of forced labour”. It means to compel a person 
to work against his will. But a voluntary agreement to do extra work is not 
•begar’ or forced labour. 2 

In Dubar Coola v. Union of India, 3 the petitioners, who were licensed 
porters at Howrah Railway Station, voluntarily entered into an agreement to 
do 2 houis extra work for the railway administration. They were paid some 
remuneration for tbeir two hours labour. They challenged the validity of this 
agreement and asked the court to restrain the railway administration from 
compelling the porters to perform begar or forced labour. The Calcutta High 
Court held that “the petitioners could not be said to be doing begar or forced 
labour within the meaning of Article 23.” The very idea that the petitioners 
had voluntarily agreed to do extra work by entering into a contract to that 
effect repeals the idea of their work being a forced labour. There was no 
element of force or illegality in the system of licence or in realizing the fees for 
such licences. The Railway authorities had the power to regulate the use of 
station. The petitioners are paid some remuneration for their two hours 
labour. Further, they get the benefit of a reduced licence fee, and in addition 
they are allowed the privilege of fjee use of the Railway premises for earning 
their livelihood In the circumstances the extra work done by them is not 
forced labour within the meaning of Art. 23 (1). 


\ Rai Bahadur v. Legal Remembrancer, AIR 1953 Cal- 522. See also Dubar Goala v. 
Union of India, AI* 1952 Cal 496- to Ibis case it was held that though slavery was 
not expressly mentioned in Art. 23, it was included in the expression "Traffic in 

2. Sh^afalT State of U. P., AIR 1959 AIL 57. 



165 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA [Chap. 

In Kahason Thangkhul v. Simin Shaili, 1 2 3 a custom required that each 
householder of the village should offer one day’s free labour to the Headman 
of the village. It was held that the custom was violative of Article 23 (1) of 
the Constitution which prohibits begar and other forms of forced labour. 

In Chandra v. State of Rajasthan? an order of the Sarpanch of a village 
calling one person from each family to come with spade and ironpan for 
making the embankment of the villlage tank and providing for a fine to be 
imposed upon person who failed to come was held to be violative of Article 

am 

The varions State laws make it an offence to compel a person to work 
against his will or without payment of wages to do any work. For instance. 
Section 3 of the U. P. Removal of Social Disabilities Act, 1947, provides that 
“no person shall refuse to tender to any person merely on the ground that he 
belongs to a scheduled caste, any service which such person already renders to 
other Hindus on the terms on which such service is rendered in the ordinary 
course of business.” A person contravening provisions of this Act is liable to 
be punished with imprisonment and fine. In State v. Banwari* the appellants 
challenged the validity of the U. P. Removal of Social Disabilities Act. The 
appellants, who were barbers and dhobies, had refused to shave and wash 
clothes of Harijans. They were, therefore, convicted under section 6 of the 
above Act. It was held that the Act does not contravene Article 23 of the 
Constitution. The Court said that when a person is prohibited from refusing 
to render service merely on the ground that the person asking for it belongs to 
a scheduled caste he is not thereby subjected to forced labour. Likewise, the 
Payment of Wages Act, 1936, provides that every employer is responsible for 
payment of wages to his employees. 

The Thirteenth Amendment to tbe Constitution of America contains a 
similar provision. It says that “neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, 
except as a punishment for a crime whereof the party shall have been duly 
convicted, shall exist within the United States or any place subject to their 
jurisdiction”, Americans had to fight a civil war to eradicate this evil of 
slavery from their country. 

It is to be noted that the protection of this Article is available to both 
citizens as well as non-citizens. 

Compulsory service for public purposes.— Clause (2) of Article 23 contains 
an exception to the above general rule. Under this clause tbe Stale is 
empowered to impose compulsory service for public purposes. But in imposing 
such compulsory service the State cannot make any discrimination on grounds 
ooly of religion, race, caste or class or any of them. For example, compulsory 
military service or social services can be imposed because they are neither begar 
nor traffic in human beings. 4 

Prohibition of employment or children in factories, etc.— Article 24 of tbe 
Constitution prohibits employment of children below 14 years of age in 
factories and hazardous employment. This provision is certainly in the interest 
of public health and safety of life. Children are assets of the nation. That 

1. AIR 1961 Maoipur I. 

2. AIR 1959 Raj. 186. 

3. AIR 1951 All. 615 ; see also Behar Harijans (Removal of Social Disabilities) Act 1949 

which contains a similar provision. 

4. Dulal Samaota v. D. M. Howrab, AIR 1958 Cal. 365. 



1 3) RIGHT AGAlNSt EXPLOIT ATtoti i6f) 

is why Article 39 of the Constitution imposes upon the State an obligation to 
ensure that the health and strength of workers, mca and women and the tender 
age of children are not abusedand that citizens are not forced by economic 
necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age or strength. 

In pursuance to the above duty State has enacted Employment of Children 
Act, 1938, the Children (Pledging of Labour) Act, 1933. 

The Employment of Children Act, 1938, prohibits employment of chil- 
dren below 14 years of age in the railways and other means of transport. The 
Indian Factories Act and the Mines Act, 1952, prohibit their employment in 
the mines and factories. 

This Article, however, does not prohibit their employment in any innocent 
or harmless job or work. 


Const. 22 



14 

Right to Freedom, of Religion 
(Arts. 25 to 28) 

The Republic of India is a Secular State. — The concept of secularism is 
implicit in the Preamble of the Constitution which declares the resolve of the 

people to secure to all its citizens “liberty of thought ; . .belief, faith and 

worship”. The Supreme Court had also observed, “although the words ‘secular 
State’ arc not expressly mentioned in the Constitution but there can be no 
doubt that our Constitution-makers wanted to establish such a State. Accord- 
ingly, the provisions of (Arts. 25.to 30), were made in the Constitution.” 
The 42 Amendment 1976, inserted the word ‘Secular’ in the Preamble. 
The amendment is intended merely to spell ‘ out clearly this concept of ‘secula- 
rism’ in the Constitution. There is no mysticism in the secular character of 
the State. 1 2 3 This is clear from the Preamble which declares a resolve of the 
people to ensure to all its citizens ‘liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith 
and worship'. In India, a Secular State was never considered as an irreligious 
or atheistic State. It only means that in matters of religion it is neutral. It is the 
ancient doctrine in India that the State protects all religions but interferes with 
none.* Secularism is thus neither anti-God, nor pro-God, it treats alike the 
devout, the antagonistic and the atheist. It eliminates God from the matters of 
the State and ensures that no one shall be discriminated against on the ground 
of religion. 8 The State can have no religion of its own. It should treat all 
religions equally. The State must extend similar treatment to the Church, the 
Mosque and the Temple. In a Secular State the State is only concerned with 
the relation between man and man. It is not concerned with the relation of 
man with God. It is left to the individual’s conscience. Every man should 
be allowed to go to Heaven in his own way. Worshipping God should be 
according to the dictates of one’s own conscience. 4 5 Man is not answerable to 
the State for the variety of his religious views”. 8 The right of worship was 
granted by God for man to worship as he pleased There can be no compul- 
sion in law of any creed or practice of any form of worship. 6 

The First Amendment of American Constitution says : “Congress shall 
make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free 

exercise thereof " Interpreting this clause in Everson v. Board 

of Education , 7 the American Supreme Court observed : “The establishment of 
religion clause of the First Amendment means at least this. Neither a State nor 
the Federal Government can set up a Church. Neither can they pass laws which 

aid one religion, aid all religions or prefer one religion over another No 

tax, in amount of large or small, can be levied to support any religious activities 
or institutions whatever form they may adopt to teach or practise religion. 

1. St. Xavier’s College V. State of Gujarat, AIR 1974 SC 1389, as per Khaooa, J.. at 
t }. 1414. 

2. Vasudev v. Vamaoji, 1LR 1881 Bom. 80. 

3. St. Xavier’s College v. State of Gujarat, supra at p. 1414. 

4. Downes v Bidwell, (1901) 182 US 244. 

5. United States v. Ballard, (1944) 322 US 78. 

6. Cantwal! v. Connecticut, (1931) 310 US 295. 

7. (1947) 330 US 1. 



U) 


RIGHT TO FREEDOM OP RELIGION 


171 


Neither a State nor the Federal Government can openly or secretly participate 
in the affairs of any religious organizations or groups and vice versa. 

Freedom of Religion in India. — Article 25 (1) guarantees to every person 
the freedom of conscience and the right to profess, practise and propagate 
religion. This right is, however, subject to public order, morality and health 
and to the other provisions of Part III of the Constitution. Also, under sub- 
clauses (a) and (b) of clause (2) of Article 25 the State is empowered by law— 

(a) to regulate or restrict any economic, financial, political or other 
secular activity which may be associated with religious practice ; 

(b) to provide for (i) social welfare and reform, and (ii) to throw open 
Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of 
Hindus. 

What Is Religion.— The term ‘religion’ is not defined in the Constitution. 
The Supreme Court has defined it broadly. Religion is a matter of faith with 
individuals or communities and it is not necessarily theislic. A religion has its 
basis in a system of beliefs or doctrines which are regarded by those who 
profess that religion conducive to their spiritual well being, but it will not be 
correct to say that religion is nothing else but a doctrine or belief. A religion 
may only lay down a Code of ethical rules for its followers to accept, it might 
prescribe rituals and observances, ceremonies and modes of worship which are 
regarded as integral parts of religion, and those forms and observances might 
extend even to matters of food and dress. 1 Religion is thus essentially a matter 
of personal faith and belief. Every person has right not only to entertain such 
religious belief and ideas as may be approved by his judgment or conscience but 
also exhibit bis belief and ideas by such overt acts which are sanctioned by his 
religion. Thus, under Art. 25 (1) a person has a two-fold freedom 

(a) freedom of conscience ; 

(b) freedom to profess, practise and propagate religion. 

The freedom of ‘conscience’ is absolute inner freedom of the citizen to 
mould bis own relation with God in whatever manner he likes. When this 
freedom becomes articulate and expressed in outward form it is “to profess 
and practise religion”. 

To ‘profess’ a religion means to declare freely and openly one’s faith and 
belief. He has right to practise his belief, by practical expression in any 
manner be likes. < , 

To ‘practise’ religion is to perform the prescribed religious duties, rites 
and rituats, and to exhibit his religious beliefs and ideas by such acts as pres- 
cribed by religious order in which he believes. 

To ‘propagate* his religion means to spread and publicise his religions 
views for tbe edification of others. But the word ‘propagation" only indicates 
persuasion and exposition without any dement of coercion. The right to pro- 
pagate one’s religion does not give a right to convert any person to one's own 
religion. There is no fundamental right to convert any person to one’s own 
religion. What Art- 25 (i) guarantees is not right to convert another person to 
one’s own religion, but to transmit or spread one’s religion by an exposition 
of its tenets. Article 25 guarantees "freedom of conscience" to every citizen, 
and not merely to the followers of one particular religion. It therefore 

1 Cotnror., H. R. £ V. L. T. Swamiar, AIR 1954 SC 282 ai p. 290, > 



172 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


postulates that there is no fundamental right to convert another person to 
one's own religion because if a person purposely undertakes the conversion of 
another person to his religion, as distinguished from his effort to transmit or 
spread the tenets of his religion that would impinge on the ‘'freedom of cons- 
cience” guaranteed to all the citizeas of the country alike. 1 2 3 

The protection of Articles 25 and 26 is thus not limited to matters of 
doctrine or belief. The extend also to acts done in pursuance of ‘religion’ and, 
therefore, contain a guarantee for rituals and observances, ceremonies and 
modes of worship which are integral parts of religion. What constitutes an 
essential part of religion or religious practice has to be _ decided by the courts 
with reference to a doctrine of a particular.religion and include practices which 
are regarded by the community as a part of its religion.* 

Restrictions on Freedom of Religion 

1. Religious liberty subject to public order, morality and health.— In the 
name of religion no act can be done against public order, morality and health 
of the public. Thus section 34 of the Police Act, prohibits the slaughter of 
cattle or indecent exposure of one's person in public place. These acts can- 
•not he justified on plea of practice of religious rites. Likewise, in the name of 
religion 'untouchability or traffic inhuman beings’ e.g. system ofDcvadasis 
(as prevalent in South India) cannot be tolerated. This freedom is also subject 
to the "other provisions of this Part", e. g. right to freedom of speech and 
expression, freedom of assembly and association, freedom to carry on a 
profession, trade aad business. The freedom to practise religion cannot affect 
the exercise of these freedoms by others. These rights are subject to the rea- 
sonable restrictions under clause (2) of Art. 19. For instance, a citizen’s free- 
dom of speech and expression in matters of religion is subject to reasonable 
restrictions under Art. 19 (2). 

Right to propagate one’s religion does not give right to any one to "for- 
cibly” convert any person to one’s own religion. Forcible conversion of any 
person to one’s own religion might disturb the public order and hence could 
be prohibited by law. 

In Rev. Stainlslaus v. State of M. P 9 the validity of the two Act— the 
Madhya Pradesh Dharroa Swatantrya Adhiniyam, 1968, and the Orissa Free- 
dom of Religion Act, 1967— passed by State Legislatures of Madhya Pradesh 
and Orissa respectively were challenged on the ground that they were violative 
of the fundamental right of the appellant guaranteed under Art. 25 (1) of the 
Constitution. These Acts were passed to prohibit forcible conversion of any 
person to one’s own religion. The appellant was prosecuted for the commis- 
sion of offences under the Madhya Pradesh Act. He contended that the right 
to ‘propagate’ one’s religion means the right to convert a person to one’s own 
religion and is a fundamental right under Art. 25 (I) of the Constitution. 
Secondly, be argued that the State Legislature had no competence to enact 
such a law as it did not fall within the purview of Entry I of List 11 and 
Entry 1 of List III of Seventh Schedule. It is covered by Entry 97 of List 1 so 
Parliament alone had the power to make the law and not the State Legisla- 
ture. 


1. Rev. Stainislaus v. State of M. P., AIR 1977 SC 908. 

2. Tomror.. Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras v.L-T. Swamiar, AIR 1954 SC 282 • 
Jagannath Ramanuj Das v. State of Orissa, AIR 1954 SC 400 : Danrah Committee’ 
Ajmer v. Syed Hussain Ali, AIR J96I SC 1402 ; P. R. J. Swami v. Stale of Tamil 
Nadu. AIR 1972 SC 1585, 

3. AIR 1977 SC 908. 



141 


RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF RELIGION 


173 


Rejecting the contentions of the appellant, the Supreme Court held that 
these impugned Acts fall within the purview of Entry 1 of List II as they are 
meant to avoid disturbances to the public order by prohibiting conversion 
from one’s religion to another in a manner reprehensible to the conscience of 
the community. These two Acts do not provide for the regulation of religion 
and therefore do not fall under Entry 7 of List I. Dealing with the meaning 
of the word public order the Court held that, “if a thing disturbs the current of 
the life of the community, and does not merely affect an individual it would 
amount to disturbance of the public order. Thus if an attempt is made to 
raise communal passions, e. g. on the ground that some one has been “for- 
cibly” converted to another religion, it would, in all probability, give rise to 
an apprehnsion of a breach of the public order, affecting the community at 
large. Therefore, legislation prohibiting forcible conversion of one’s own 
religion in the interest of public order can be passed aDd is valid. 

2. Regulation of economic, financial, political and secular activities associa- 
ted with religions practies- Clause (2) (a).— The freedom to practise extends 
only to those activities which are the essence of religion. It would not cover 
secular activities which do not form the essence of religion. It is not always 
easy to say which activities fall under religious practice or which are of sec- 
ular, commercial or political nature associated with religious practice. Each 
case must be judged by its own facts and circumstances. In Mohd Hanif 
Quareshi v. State of Bihar,' the petitioners claimed that the sacrifice of cows 
on the occasion of Bakrid was an essential part of his religion and therefore 
the Stale law forbidding the slaughter of cows is violative of his right to 
practice religion. The court rejected this argument and held that the sacrifice 
of cow on the Bakrid day was Dot an essential part of Mohammndan 
religion and hence could be prohibited by State under clause (2) (a) of 
Article 25. In ddelatd Co. v. Commonwealth,* it was held that a person could 
not be allowed in exercise of his freedom of religious practice and pro- 
fession to carry on an anti-war propaganda in the guise of religion when the 
nation is at war. Thus the political activities though arising out of religious 
belief by a particular organisation were held not to be protected by the Con- 
stitution. 

3. Social Welfare and Social Reforms— Clause (2) (b). — Under clause (2) 
(b) of Art. 25 the State is empowered to make laws for social welfare and 
social reform. Thus under this clause the State can eradicate social practices 
and dogmas which stand in the path of the country’s onward progress. Such 
laws do not affect the essence of any religion. This clause declares that where 
there is conflict between the need of social welfare and reform and religious 
practice, religion must yield. In State of Bombay v. Varasu BapamaU* 
an Act which prohibited bigamy was held valid under clause (2) (b). Polygamy 
is not an essential part of the Hindu religion, therefore it can be regulated by- 
law In an American case of Reynolds v. United States* a State law made it 
a criminal offence to marry with another while having a living spouse. The 
appellant was punished for attempting to take a second wife under the Sanc- 
tion and command of his religion. The Supreme Court held that his punish- 
ment was valid under the statute which prohibited bigamy. The Court said, 
‘Congress was deprived of all legislative power over mere opinion, but was 
left free to reach actions which were in violation of social duties or subversive 



174 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Chap. 


of good order”. Prohibition of evil practices such as Sati or system of Deva- 
dasi has been held to be justified under this clause. 1 2 3 

Under this sub-clause. State is empowered to throw open all Hindu reli- 
gious institutions of a ‘public character’ to all classes and sections of Hindus. 
It ensures an individual's legal right to enter into a temple unobstructed irres- 
pective of his caste, uotoucbability, social inequality or under-privileged class. 
The Hindu Temples, the Sikh Grudwaras, the Jain Temples and Budh Vihars 
can be thrown open to all sections of Hindus. The expression ’'Hindu” includes 
Jain, Sikh and Buddhists. 

The right protected under this clause is a right to enter into a temple for 
the purpose of worship. But it does not follow from this that, that right is, 
absolute and unlimited in character. No one can claim that a temple must 
be kept open for worship at all hours of the day and Dight or that he should 
be permitted to perform those services personally which the Acharya alone 
could perform a The State cannot regulate the manner in which the worship 
of the deity is performed by the authorised pujaris of the temple or the hours 
and days on which the temple is to be kept open for darshan or puja for 
devotees* 

The right of Sikhs to wear and carry Kirpans is recognised as a religious 
practice in Explanation 1 of Article 25. This does not mean that he can keep 
any number of Kirparu. He is entitled to keep only one sword. He cannot 
possess mote than one Kirpan without a licence. 

Freedom to manage religious affairs— Art. 26. — Article 26 says that, sub- 
ject to public order, morality and health, every religious denomination or any 
section of it shall have the following rights — 

(a) to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable 
purposes. 

(b) to manage its own affairs in matters of religion, 

(c) to own and acquire movable and immovable property, 

(d) to administer such property in accordance with law. 

The right guaranteed by Article 25 is an individual right while the right 
guaranteed by Article 26 is the right of an ‘organised body’ like the religious 
denomination or any seciioo thereof. In Webster's Dictionary, the word 
‘denomination’ has been defined as a “collection of individuals, classed together 
under the same name” generally a religious sect or body having a common 
faith and organisation is designated by a distinctive value. Thus in tbe large 
sense ‘Hinduism’ is a denomination in contradistinction to Christians and Mus- 
lims. In a limited “sense" the various philosophies governing the Hindu Socie- 
ty, such as, Advaitas. Dwaitas, Vishistadwaitas and Saivites can also be termed 
as denominations. 4 

Right to establish and maintain Institutions for Religious and Charitable 
purposes.— Under clause (a) of Art. 26 every religious denomination has right 
to ‘establish and maintain' institutions for religious and charitable purposes. 
The words “establish and maintain” in Art. 26 (a) must be read together and 
therefore it is only those institutions which a religious denomination estab- 

1. Saifuddin v. State of Bombay, AIR 1962 SC 853. 

2. VecsfcaUcaK ana Devatu v. Slate of Mysore, AIR 1958 SC 255. 

3. Vaguapuiusbadji v. Mutdas. AIR 1966 SC 1119. 

4. Commr., H. R. C- v. U T. Swamtar, AIR 1954 SC 2S2. 



14 ] 


RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF RELIGION 


175 


Itsbes which it can claim to maintain it. Thus in Azecz Basha v. Union of 
India, 1 2 3 the Supreme Court held that the Aligarh University was not established 
by the Muslim minority, therefore they cannot claim the right to ‘maintain’ it. 
It was established under statute passed by Parliament. 

Right to Manage ‘matters of Religion’.— Under Article 26 (b) a religious 
denomination or organisation is free to manage its own affairs in ‘matters of 
religion’. I he State cannot interfere in the exercise of this right unless they 
run counter to public order, health or morality. Accordingly, every religious 
denomination or organisation enjoys complete freedom in the matters of decid- 
ing what rites and ceremonies arc essential according to the tenets of the 
religion they hold. The court, however, has the right to determine whether a 
particular rite or ceremony is regarded as essential by the tenets of a particular 
religion.* 

The right is, it is to be noted, confined to ‘matters of religion*. The 
term ‘matters of religion’ includes religious practices, rites and ceremonies 
Considered essential for practice of religion. The right is, however, subject to' 
the regulatory power of the State under clause (2) (b) of Art. 25. This means 
that secular activities connected with religious institutions can be regulated by 
State by law. 

In SaifudJin Saheb v. State of Bombay* the petitioner, who was the head 
of the Dawoodi Bobra community, challenged the constitutionality of tbe 
Bombay Prevention of Ex-Commuuication Act, 1949, on the ground that the 
provisions of the Act infringe his rights guaranteed in Arts. 25 and 26. The 
petitioner claimed that as tbe Head of the Dawoodi Bohra Community he has 
the right to cx-communicate a member and this power is an integral part of 
the religious faith and belief of the Dawoodi Bohra Community. The 
Supreme Court struck down the impugned provision as violative of Articles 
25 and 26 of the Constitution. The majority said that where an ex-communi- 
cation is itself based on religious grounds such as lapse from the orthodox 
religious creeds or doctrine or breach of some practice considered as an 
essential part of religion by a community it forms part of the management by 
the community, through its religion's head, “of its own affairs in matters of 
religion”. The impugned enactment which takes away this right of the Head 
of the Community to ex-communicate even on religious grounds is violative of 
Art. 26 (bj. The position of the Dai-ul-Mutlaqu is an essential part of the 
creed of the Dawoodi Bohra sect. Faith in his spiritual mission and in the 
efficacy of his administration is one of the Bonds that hold the community 
together as a uni t. The power of ex-communication is vested in hi at tor the 
purpose of enforcing discipline and keep the denomination together as an 
entity. The purity of fellowship Is secured by tbe removal of persons who 
had rendered themselves unfit and unsuitable for membership of the sect. 
The majority observed, "The mere fact that certain civil rights which might 
be lost by members ns u result of ex-communication made on religious grounds 
which the Act protects, docs not offer sufficient basis for a conclusion that it 
is a law “proving for social welfare and reform" within Art. 25 (b)". 

But the Chief Justice, Mr. B. P. Sinha gave a dissenting judgment, lie was 
of the view that the right of cx-communication is not a purely religious matter 
and that it had its social implications in making the ex-comm unicated person 

1. AtR 1968 SC 662 

2. Motid. Ilamf Quamtu *. State of Bihar, AIR 1953 SC 731 

3. AIR 1962 SC 853. 



176 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


{Chap. 


a sort of "untouchable” in his community, which will be contrary to the 
injunctions mentioned in Article 17 of the Constitution by which untouchabi- 
lity has been abolished. This decision has been criticised by jurists.* 

In Bira Kishore Dev v. Stale of Orissa ,* the Shri Jagannath Temple Act 
took the management of secular activities of the temple from the Raja of Puri 
and vested it in Committee constituted under the Act. The court held the 
Act valid as it did not effect the religious aspect. 

Right to administer property owned by denomination.— Under clauses (c) 
and (d) of Art. 26 a religious denomination has the right to acquire and own 
property and to administer such property in accordance with law. The right 
to administer property owned by a religious denomination is a limited right, 
and it is subject to the regulatory power of the State in clause (2) (a) of Art. 
25 and also any general property law. Thus there is a clear distinction bet- 
ween the tight to manage its own affairs in ‘matters of religion’ and the right 
to ‘manage its property’ by a religious denomination. The former is a funda- 
mental right which cannot be taken away except on grounds mentioned in 
Art. 25, while the latter can be regulated by laws. 

It is to be noted that the rights under clauses (c) and (d) of Art. 26, are 
confined to the existing rights to admiaister its property where they had 
already been vested in a religious denomination. Clauses (c) and (d) do not 
create any new rights but they simply protect the continuance of the existing 
rights. The existing rights to administer its property by a religious denomina- 
tion cannot be destroyed or taken away completely. It can only be regulated 
by law with a view to improve the administration of property for the better 
utilization of the endowment property. 

Thus the law must leave the right of administration of property to the 
religious denomination itself subject to such restrictions and regulations as it 
might choose to impose. Thus in fiatl Lai v. State of Bombay, 9 a law which 
took away the right or administration altogether from religious denomination 
and vested it aDy other secular authority was held to be violative of the right 
guaranteed by Article 26 (d). However, if the right to administer property 
had never, vested in the denomination or had been validly surrendered by it or 
bad otherwise been lost. Article 26 will not create any such right in religious 
denomination. 1 2 3 4 5 

Thus as regards the administration of its property the religious deno- 
mination has been placed on a different footing from tbe right to manage its 
own affairs in matters of religion. The latter is a fundamental right which no 
Legislature can take away while the former can be regulated by laws which the 
Legislature can validly impose. 8 

Freedom from taxes for promolion of any particular religion Art. 27.— 

Article 27 provides that no persoa shall be compelled to pay any tax for the 
promotion or maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination. 

1. See P. K. Tripaibi— Secularism and Judicial Review, (1966) 1 L. 1. 164. Dr. Tripathi 
Supports the roioonty opinion. Denelt, Freedom; of Religion under the iDdian 
Constitution. Ex-communication, (1963) 12 Int. and Comp. LQ 693. 

2. AIR 1964 SC 1501. 

3. AIR 1954 SC 388 ; Commr., H. R. E. v. L. T. Swannar, AIR 1955 SC 282. 

4. Dargah Committee, Ajmer v. Husain All, AIR 1961 SC 1402. See also Aten Basha 
v. Union of India, AIR 1968 SC 662. 

5. Sri Govmdlejt v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1963 SC 1638. 



I4J 


RIGHT TO FREEDOM OP RELIGION 


177 


This Article emphasises the secular character of the State. The public money 
collected by way of tax cannot be spent by the State for the promotion of any 
particular religion. 

The reason underlying this provision is that India being a Secular State 
and there being freedom of religion guaranteed by the Constitution, both to 
individual and groups it is against the policy of the Constitution to pay out of 
public funds any money for the promotion or maintenance of the particular 
religion or religious denominations. 1 2 

It is to be noted here that what this Article prohibits is the levying of fax 
and not of fee. In Rati Lai v. State of Bombay , 3 the Supreme Court has held 
that “A tax is in the nature of a compulsory enaction of money by a public 
authority for public purposes. Tbc imposition is made for public purpose to 
meet the general expenses of the State without reference to any special advan- 
tage to be conferred upon the tax-payer. Tax is a common burden and the only 
return which the tax-payer gets is a participation in the common benefits of the 
State. Fees are, on the other hand, payments primarily in public interest but 
, f or some special service rendered or some special work done for the benefit, of 
those from whom the payments are demanded. On the basis of this distinc- 
tion between tax and fee the Supreme Court in Sri Jagannash v. Stale of 
Orissa * held that the levy under the Orissa Hindu Religious Endowments Act, 
1939 was in the nature of a fee and not tax. The payment was demanded 
only for the purposes of meeting the expenses of the Commissioner and bis 
office which was the machinery set up for due administration of the affairs of 

the religious institution. The object of the contribution was not the fostering 
or preservation of Hindu religion or of the denomination within it, but to see 
that religious institutions were properly administered. 

The prohibition is of aid to any particular religion. This means that if 
State aid is extended to all religious institutions along with secular ones alike 
without any discrimination, Article 27 will not be applicable. 

Prohibition of Religions Instruction in State-aided Institntions— Article 28. 
-According to Article 28 (1) no religious instruction shall be imparted m any 
educational institution wholly maintained out of State funds. But this clause 
shall not apply to an educational institution which is administered by the 
State but has been established under any endowment or trust which requires 
that religious instruction shall be imparted in such institution. Under clause 
1 no person attending any educational institution recognised by the State 

of receiving aid out of State funds shall be required to take part in any reh- 
cious instruction that may be imparted in such istitutions or to attend any 
religious worship that may be conducted in such institution or to any premises 
attached thereto unless such person or if such person is a minor bis guardian 
has given his consent thereto. . 

& Thus Article 28 mentions four types of educational institutions : 

(a) Institutions wholly maintained by the State. 

(b) Institutions recognised by the State. 

fcl Institutions that are receiving aid out of the State fund. 

(d) Institutions that are administered by the State but are established 
under anv trust or endowment. . . . . _ . 

Un< Inthe Institutions or (a) type no religious instructions can be impacted. 

(hi and tc) type of institntions religious instructions may be imparled only 
with lb" consent of , ho individuals, m the (d) type institutions, there is no 
restriction on religious instructions. 


1. Cooimr., H. R. E- 

2. AIR 1954 SC 388. 

3. AIR 1954 SC 400. 


L. T. Swamiar, AIR 1954 SC 282. 



xs 

Cultural and Educational Rights 
(Arts. 29 and SO) 

Article 29 (1) guarantees to any section of the citizens residing in any 
part of India having a distinct language, script or culture of its own, the right 
to conserve the same, i. e. language, script or culture. A minority community 
can preserve its language, script or culture by and through educational institu- 
tions. Therefore, the right to establish and maintain institutions of their choice 
Is necessary concommitant to the right to preserve its distinctive language, 
script or culture. This right is guaranteed to them by Article 31 (1) which 
says that all minorities whether based on religion or language shall have the 
right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. This 
right is further protected by Article 30 (2) which prohibits the State in granting ' 
aid to educational institutions from discriminating against any educational 
institutions on the ground that it is under the management of a minority 
whether based on religion or language. This right is, however, subject to 
clause (2) of Article 29, according to which no citizen shall be denied admis- 
sion into any educational institutions maintained by the State or receiving aid 
out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of 
them. This Article applies to both citizens and non-citizens. 

Articles 29 and 30 thus confei four distinct rights* : 

(a) Right of any sections of citizens to conserve its own language, script 
or culture [Art. 29 (1)1. 

(b) Right of all religious and linguistic minorities to establish and admi- 
nister educational institutions of their choice (Art. 30 (1 jj. 

(c) Right of an educational institution not to be discriminated in matters 
of State aid on ground that it is managed by a religious or linguistic minority 
[Art. 30 (2)1. 

(d) Right of the citizen pot to be denied admission into any State-main- 
tained or State-aided institution on ground of religion, caste, race or language 
[Art. 29 (2)J. 

Relation between Article 29 (2) and Article 15 (1).— It is to be noted that 
Article 15 (1) also prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, 
sex or place of birth. However, it differs from Article 29 (2) in many respects : 

(1) Article 15 protects all citizens against the State whereas the protection 
of Article 29 (2) extend* against the State or anybody who denies the right 
conferred by it. 

(2) Article 15 protects all citizens against discrimination generally but 
Article 29 (2) Is protection against a particular species of wrongs, namely, 
denial of admission into educational institutions of the types mentioned therein. 

(3) Article 15 is qoite general and wide in its terms and applies to all 
citiztns whether they belong to the majority or minority groups, and gives 

J, SI. Xaviers College v. State of Cujarar. AIR 1974 SC 1389. 



15 ) 


CULTURAL AND EDUCATIONAL RIGHTS 


179 


protection to alt citizens against discrimination by the State on certain specific 
grounds. Article 29 (2) confers a special right on citizens for admission into 
educational institutions maintained or aided by the State. 

(4) Article 15 (l) prohibits discriminations on the grounds of sex or place 
of birth whereas Article 29 (2) does not mention these grounds. 1 2 3 4 5 6 * Thus under 
Article 29(2) a girl student can be denied admission in educational institutions.’ 

The right to admission into an educational institution conferred by 
Article 29 (2) is a right of an individual given to him as a citizen and not as a 
member of any community. 8 

Article 29 (2) is quite general and wide in terms and applies to all citizens 
whether they belong to majority or minority groups. Therefore a school run 
by a minority, if it is aided by the State funds, cannot refuse admission to boys 
belonging to their communities. The State cannot direct such school to restrict 
admissions to their own community. 

In State of Madras V. Chamapakam Dorairajan* an order of Madras 
Government had fired the proportion of students of each community that could 
be admitted into the State Medical and Engineering Colleges. The order was 
challenged on the ground that it denied admission to a person only on the 
ground of religion or caste. The petitioners in this case were denied admission 
only because they were Brahmins. The Supreme Court held the order invalid 
for being violative to Article 29 (2). 

After Ibis case Article 15 (2) was amended by the Constitution (First 
Amendment) Act, 1954. The amendment empowers the State to make special 
provisions for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward 
classes of citizens or the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Accord- 
ingly the State can now reserve seats in public institutions for member of back- 
ward classes. 

In State oj Bombay v. Bombay Educational Society , 8 the Supreme Court 
struck down an order of the Bombay Government banning admission of those 
whose language was not English into schools having English as a medium of 
instruction because it denied admission solely on the ground of language. The 
order, the Court said, would not be valid, even if the object for making it was 
the promotion or advancement of national language. 

The protection of Article 29 (2) does not apply where the student is 
expelled from an institution on grounds of indiscipline,® and where he is refused 
admission on the grounds of his not possessing requisite qualification.’ 

Right of Minorities to establish and manage Educational Institutions. — 
Atticle 30 (1) guarantees to all linguistic and religious minorities the ‘right to 
establish’ and tbe ‘right to administer’ educational institutions of their own 
choice. Tbe right is conferred by this clause on two types of minorities— rcli- 

1. Stale of Bombay v- Bombay Education Society, AIR 1954 SC 561 . 

2. University of Madras v. Sbantha Bai, AIR 1954 Mad. 67. 

3. Joseph Thomas v. State of Kerala, AIR 1958 Ker. 33 ; State of Madras v. Champakam 

Dorairajan, AIR 1951 SC 226. 

4. AIR 1951 SC 226. 

5. AIR 1954 SC 561. 

6. Ramesh Chandra v. Principal, B. B. I. College, AIR 1953 All. 90. 

7- Nagcshwara Rao v. Principal, Medical College, AIR 1962 AP 2 12. 



180 


CONSTTimONAt LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


gious and linguistic minorities. The right conferred upon the above minorities 
is to establish and administer educational ' institutions of their choice. The 
word "establish” indicates the right to bring into existence, while the right to 
administer an institution means the right to effectively manage and conduct 
the affairs of the institution. The administration connotes management of 
the affairs of the institution. The management must be free of control so that 
the founders of their-nominces can mould the institution as they think fit in 
accordance with their ideas of how the interest of Ibe community in general 
and the institution in particular will be best served.* Thus it leaves it to the 
choice of the minority to establish such educational institutions as will serve 
both purposes, namely, the purpose of preserving their religion, language or 
culture, and the purpose of giving through good general education to their 
children in their own language." 1 - 

In D. A. V. College, Bbatinda v. State of Punjab , 8 the university declared 
that PuDjabi would be the sole medium of instruction in the affiliated colleges. 
The Court held that the right of the minority to establish and administer 
educational institutions of their choice includes the right to have a choice of 
medium of instructions also. The right under Article 30 (1) is available to 
both the pre-Conslitutioo and post-Constitution institutions. 

Clause (2) - of Art. 30 prohibits the State from making discrimination in 
the matter of grant of aid to any educational institution on the ground that 
it is managed by a religious minority or linguistic minority. 

The Constitution (44th Amendment) Act, 1978 

This Amendment has abolished the right to property as fundamental right 
guaranteed by Arts. 19 <1) (f) and 31 of the Constitution. Consequently, Art. 
19 (l) (f) and Art. 31 have been omitted from Part III of the Constitution. 
However, it has been ensured that the removal of property from the list of 
fundamental right would not affect the right of minorities to establish and 
administer educational institutions of their choice. For this purpose, the 
Amendment has inserted a new clause (1- A) in Article 30 of the Constitution. 
Clause (1-A) says that in making any law providing for the compulsory acqui- 
sition of any property of an educational institution established and adminis- 
tered by a minority, referred to in clause (\), the State shall ensure that the 
amount fixed by or determined under such law for the acquisition of such 
property is such as would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under 
that clause. 

Relationship between Arts. 29 (1) and 30 (1).— Tbe inter-relation of Arts. 
29 (1) and 30 (1) was elaborately examined by the Supreme Court in the recent 
case of St. Xaviers College v. State of Gujarat * In this case the validity of sec- 
tions 33A, 40, 41, 51-A, 52-A of the Gujarat University Act, 1949, as amended 
by Act of 1973 was questioned by the petitioners who is running St. Xaviers 
College of Arts and Commerce in Abmedabad. The petitioners contended 
that the Act infringed their rights guaranteed in Article 30 ( 1 ) of the Constitu- 
tion. On behalf of Ibe State, it was contended, that the -protection to minorities 
guaranteed by Art. 30 (I) is not available to this College because it was not 
founded for the conservation of language, script or culture, as mentioned in 
Article 29 of the Constitution, 


t. St. Xaviers College v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1974 SC 1389, per KJbanna, J. 
2 In re, Kerala Education Bill, AIR 1958 SC 956. 

3. MR 1911 SC mi. 



15] 


CULTURAL AND EDUCATIONAL RIGHTS 


!S1 


The court, after reviewing its earlier decisions, 1 held that Article 30 (I) 
covers institutions imparting general secular education. The object of Article 
30 is to enable children of minorities to go out in the world fully equipped. 
It Sill be wrong to read Article 30 (I) as restricting the right of minorities to 

establish and administer educational institutions or theit choice only to cases 

where such institutions are concerned with language, script or culture of the 


that the rights might meet in a given i 


tion civen to sections of citizens to conserve their language, script or culture. 
Article 30 is a special richt to minorities to establish educational institutions 
of their choke. The Court pointed out the following distinction between these 
two Articles : 

(1) While Art. 29 (1) confers tight on any section of the citizens which 
will include the majority section. Art. 30 (1) confers the right only on mino- 
rities based on religion or language. 

(2> While Article 29 (1) is concerned with only three subj'ects, viz., lan- 
guage, script or culture, . Article 30 (1) deals with minorities of the Nation 
based’on language or religion. 

131 While Article 29 (I) is concerned with the right of conserve language, 
script or culture. Article 30 (1) deals with the right of minorities to establish 
and administer educational institutions of tbcir choice. 

141 While Article 29 (1) does not deal with education as such. Article 
■xn / 1 1 deals onlv with the establishment and administration of educational insti- 
tutfo^ Thus conservation of language, script or culture, under Art. 29 (I) 
hv rn ,, ns w holly unconnected with educational Institution, and similarly 
MtabUshmeot and administration of educational institutions by a majority 
under Art 30 (1) may be unconnected with acy motive to conserve language, 
script or culture. 

Power of Government to regulate minority run educational Institutions— 
The richt conferred on the religious and linguistic minorities to administer 
educational institutions of theit choice is not an absolute right. This right is 
not free from regulation. Just as regulatory measures are necessary for 
maintaining educational character and content or minority institutions similarly 
regulatory measures are necessary for ensuring, orderly, efficient and sound 
•dm nistratiOD The right to administer is not the tight to maladmmister* 
m right to administer implies a correlative duty to good administration. 

In re Kerala Edacation BUI,- the Supreme Court said that the fundamental 
right riven to nil minorities under Atticle 30 (1) to establish and administer 
educational institutions of their choice does nol militate against the claim of 
the State to insist that in granting aid the Stale may not prescribe reasonable 
regulations to ensure the eseellence of the institutions to be aided. Accord- 
[™tv the court tn this ease upheld certain condilions designed to give prolre- 
rtnnaud setorily to the ill-paid teachers who were rendering service to he 
turn and security ...^ classes 3S permissible restrictions which the 

Srie 0 ”ekr?mporrm“oS as a'eindi.lon for granting uid to thei, ednea- 

. Tn re Kerala Education Bill, AIR I9S8 SC 956 ; W. Prowl v. State of Bihar, AIR 

*■ sc 475 ; Sidhrajbhai v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1963 SC 540- 

2. St. Xaviers College v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1974 SC 1389. 

3. AIR 1958 SC 956. 



182 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


tional institutions . However, the conditions for granting aid should not be 
imposed in such a manner so as to take away the rights of minority guaranteed 
by Article 30(1). 

In Sidhrajihai v. State of Gujarat, 1 * 3 the Court held that though the right 
conferred by Article 30 (1) is absolute in terms, it is open to the State to 
impose such regulations upon the exercise of this right which will secure the 
proper functioning of the institution in the matters of education. Regulations 
can be made to prevent the housing of an educational institution in unhealthy 
surroundings or for preventing setting up for contiouation of an institution 
without qualified teachers. Thus regulations made in the true interests of 
efficiency of instruction, discipline, health, sanitation, morality, public order 
and the like may be imposed. Such regulations are not restrictions on the 
substance of the right. Their main object is to secure to proper functioning 
of the institutions ia the matters of education. 

Though a regulation can be made to prevent maladministration in minority 
run educational institution but at the same time it has to be ensured that 
under the regulatory power nothing is done which would destroy the character 
of the institution as minority institution. The right conferred by Article 30 
( 1 ) is intended to be real and effective and not a mere pious and abstract 
sentiment. Such a right cannot be allowed to be whittled down by any 
measure in the guise of a regulation. Regulations which may lawfully be 
imposed as a condition of receiving grant or of recognition must be directed 
to making the institution effective as educational institution, while retaining 
its character as minority institution. Such regulations, must satisfy dual test, 
(1) they must be reasonable, and (2) they are regulative of the educational 
character of the institution and is conducive in making the institution an 
effective vehicle of education for the miaority community or other persons 
who resort to it. 

In Sidhrajbhai’s cast,* the Bombay Government issued an order reserv- 
ing 80 per cent, of the seats to the nominees of the Government in the 
minority run training colleges. The order also provided that refusal 
to admit Government nominated teachers would result in withholding 
recognition and stoppage of grant-in-aid to such institutions. The Court 
held that the order threatening to withhold grant-in-aid and recognition of 
College were violative of Article 30 (1) as they were not imposed to make 
the institution as an effective vehicle of education. 

In St. Xaviers College v. State of Gujarat ,* Supreme Court has reviewed 
all its earlier decisions on Article 30 (1) of the Constitution. The facts of the 
case were briefly as follows— The petitioner, a Jesuist Society of Ahmedabad, is 
running St. Xaviers College of Arts and Commerce in Ahmedabad which 
is affiliated to the Gujarat University, They challenged the validity of sections 
33- A, 40, 41, 51-A and 52- A of the Gujarat University Act, 1949, as amended 
by the Act of 1973 as violative of their right guaranteed by Article 30 (1) of the 
Section 3V A provides, that every CoMeje shall be under the 
management of a governing body which shall include amongst its members, a 
representative of the university nominated by the Vice-Chancellor and represen- 

1. MR 1961 SC 540. 

Z AIR 1963 SC 540. 

3. AIR 1974 SC 1389. 



CULTURAL AND EDUCATIONAL RIGHTS 


183 


,15] - 


tativcs of teachers, non-teaching staff and students of the college. It also 
provides for a selection committee for recruitment of the Principal and the 
members of the staff. It will consist of a representative nominated by the Vice- 
Chancellor, These provisions in effect displace the managing committee of the 
College. Section 40 provides that teaching and training shall be conducted by 
the university and shall be imparted by teachers of the university. Section 
41 provides that all colleges affiliated to the university shall be the 
constituent colleges of the university. It also confers power on the univer- 
sity to approve the appointment of the teachers made by the College. Sec- 
tion 51-A provides that no member of the teaching or non-teaching staff of 
the affiliated college shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except 
v. after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges and given 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard and to make representation against 
such penalty proposed to be inflicted, and the penally is approved by the 
Vice-Chhancellor or any officer of the university authorised by him. Section 
52-B provides for reference of any dispute connected with conditions of 
service between the governing body and members of the teaching staff to an 
arbitration consisting of one member nominated by the governing body of 
the college— one nominated by the member concerned and an umpire appoint- 
ed by the Vice-Chancellor. 

The Constitutional validity of these provisions was challenged by the 
petitioner on the ground that they amount to violation of the right of minority 
to administer educational institutions of their choice. On behalf of the State, 
it was argued that these measures were intended to prevent maladministration 
of minority institution. 

The Court held that these provisions abridge the right of the minority 
to administer the educational institutions of their choice and therefore do not 
apply to minority institutions. The governing body of the college is a part of 
its administration. The right to administer is the right to ‘conduct* and 
‘manage’ the affairs of the institution. This right is exercised through a body 
of persons in whom the founder has faith and confidence and full autonomy 
in that sphere. Autonomy in administration means right to administer effec- 
tively the affairs of the institutions. The choice in the personnel of manage- 
ment is a part of the administration. It also includes right to choose teachers 
of its choice. The right however is subject to permissible regulatory measures. 
The regulatory measure should not restrict the right of administration but 
facilitate it through the the instrumentality of the management of the minority 
institution. If administration is to be imposed it <hou!d be done through the 
instrument of the existing management not by displacing it. If administra- 
tion goes to a body in the selection of whom the founders have no say the 
administration would be displaced. The Court said that these provisions 
have the effect of displacing the management and entrusting it to a different 
agency. The autonomy in administration is lost. These provisions cannot 
therefore apply to minority institutions. 1 

The next question which arose for consideration was whether minority 
institutions have a fundamental right to affiliation. The petitioners contended 
the right to establish educational institutions of their choice will be without 
any meaning of affiliation is denied. The Court, however, held that there is 
no fundamental right of minority to affiliation to a university. When a mino- 
rity institution applies to a university to be affiliated, it expresses its- choice to 


t <rf W Procrei v State of Bihar, AIR 1969 SC 465 ; SK Patrov. State of Bibar, AIR 
1970 SC 259 ; I9AV College v. Slate of Punjab, AIR 1970 SC 1731. 



J84 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA (Chap. 

participate in the system of genera! education and course of instruction pies- 
cribed by that university. It agrees to follow the uniform course of study. 
Affiliation is regulating the educational character and content of the minority 
institution. These regulations are not only reasonable in the interest of 
general secular education but also conduct to the improvement in the strength 
of tbe minority institutions. Therefore measures which will regulate the course 
of study, the qualifications and appointment of teachers, the conditions of 
employment of teachers, the health and hygience of students, facilities for 
libraries and laboratories are all compared in matters germane to affiliation of 
minority institutions. These regulatory measures for affiliation are for unifor- 
mity, efficiency and excellence in educational courses and do not violate 
any fundamental right of the minority institutions under Article 30. 
Though there is no fundamental right to recognition or affiliation, but to 
deny affiliation or recognition to minority institutions except upon certain 
terms and conditions tantamount to the surrender of their right to administer 
educational institutions of their choice would in effect deprive them of their 
right under Article 30 (1). 

Dwivedi, J., did not agree with the majority opinion, on all points, and 
delivered a dissenting judgment. According to him institutions imparting 
secular general education may be subject to greater regulation than Ihose which 
are imparting religious, cultural and linguistic instructions solely. The 
students do not belong only to the minorities ; they belong also to the Nation. 
The oyer-accentuated argument of imparting secular general education in 
a religious atmosphere seems to me to overlook this important national aspect. 
Secular general education should be the Nation's first concern, he said. 

He did not agree with the majority that a regulation must improve the 
excellence of the minority institutions. The State may prescribe the curriculum 
and syllabus for the minority educational institutions and they may not neces- 
sarily be calculated to improve the excellence of the institution. Curriculum 
and syllabus is prescribed not for the excellence but for uniform standard of 
institutions. A uniform standard is necessary owing to the different calibre 
of stndents coming from different developed and undeveloped State of society 
and from different developed and undeveloped geographical regions of the 
country. 

The righ under Article 30 (1) » subject to Article 29 (2) which says that 
no citizen shall be denied admission into any educational instil utions main- 
tained or aided by the State on the grounds only of religion, race, caste, 
language or any of them. So a State-aided institution established by minority 
must not refuse admission to a member of any other community. It does not 
cease to be a minority institution only by admitting members of any com- 
munity. 

In Mark Netto v. Govt, of Kerala ,' the appellant, who was manager of a 
Roman Catholic Mission School, Trivendrum for boys, appllied to the Edu- 
cation Authorities in Kerala for permission to admit girl students in their 
High School although there was already in existence a facility for the edu- 
cation of the girls in the locality (Muslim Girls High School) Education 
Authorities refused to give sanction for admission of the girl students under 
Kerala Education Rules, 1959 mainly on the grounds that (1) the said school 


S. AIR 1979 SC 83. 



15J CULTURAL AND EOUCAllONAL BSCHTS Ig5 

was not established as mixed school and it was purely a boys school and (?) 
there was also facility for the education of the girls of the locality in the 
near Muslim girls school situated within radius of one mile. The 
appellant contended that Kerala Education Rules 1959 is violation 
of Art. 30 (1) of the Constitution as it interferes with the right or the Christian 
community to administer aducational institution of tbeir choice. He argued 
that the Christian community in the locality for various reasons wanted their 
girls also to receive tbeir education in the school of their community. They 
did not think it in their interest to send them to the Muslim girls school. 

The Supreme Court held that the Rule must be interpreted narrowly 
and is inapplicable to a minority educational institution. The Rule does 
not authorise Educational Authorities to refuse permission to admit the girl 
students of their community ia the school of their community. If the Rule is 
interpreted widely it would sanction the withholding of permission for admis- 
sion of girl students in the boys minority school, and would thus be violative 
of Art. 30. If so widely interpreted it crosses the barrier of regulatory measures 
and comes in the region of interference with the administration of the mino- 
rity institution. The peimission for admission of girls in the boys minority 
school was refused not on the ground of any apprehension of detereoration 
of morality or descipline if co-education is permitted in the school but raaioly 
in the interest of the existing Muslim girls school, and therefore it violates 
the freedom guaranteed to minority to administer the educational institution 
of their choice. 

In Lily Kurian v. Sr. Lewina 1 the validity of the Ordinance 33 (4) issued 
under the Kerala University Act, 1957 was challenged as violative of Art. 30 
(1) of the Constitution. Under the Ordinance 33 (4) a teacher has right to 
appeal to the Vice-Chancellor agaiost any desciplinary action taken by the 
managing Committee of minority educational institution. The appellant 
Smt. Lily Kurian, was appointed as principal of the St. Joseph’s Training 
College for Women, Ernakulam. The college was established by a religious 
society of Nuns, belonging to the Roman Catholic Church and was affiliated 
to the University of Kerala. As a result of certain incidents a 
desciplinary inquiry was held against the appellant and she was 
found gui'ty of misconduct. The Head of the religious society by virtue 
or her office as the President of Managing Board, dismissed the appellant 
from service. The appellant filed an appeal before the Vice-Chancellor under 
Ordinance 33 (4) who quashed the order of dismissal and directed the Manage- 
ment to allow her to function as Principal. 

The Supreme Court held that the Ordinance 33 (4) is violative of the right 
of the minority to administer educational institution of its own choice 
guaranteed by Art 30(1) of the Constitution. The conferral of a right of 
appeal to an outside authority like the Vice-Chancellor under Ordinance 33 (4) 
takes away the disciplinary power of a miaority educational authority. The 
Vice-Chancellor has power to veto its disciplinary control. This is a clear 
interference with the disciplinary power of the minority institution. The State 
may "regulate the exercise of the right to administration but it has no power 
to impose any restriction” which is destructive of the right itself. The con- 
ferral of such wide powers on the Vice-Chancellor amounts, in reality, to a 
fetter on the right to administration under Art 30 (1). This would so affect 
the descritionary control of a minority educational institution as to be 
subvertive of its institutional right and can hardly be regarded as a “regula- 
tion” or a "restriction” in tbe interest of the institution. 

I. AIR 1973 SC Si. 

Const. 24 



xe 


Saving of Certain Laws 
(Arts. 31- R., 31-B Sc 3X-C) 

Constitution 44th Amendment Act, 1978.— The Sub-heading— Right to 
Property— and Art.,31, under which the right to property was a fundamental 
right, have been omitted by the Constitution (44th Amendment) Act, 1978. 
The Amendment takes away right to property as a fundamental right and 
makes it only a legal right which will be regulated by ordinary law. Conse- 
quently, Art. 31 has been deleted and a new Chapter IV namely— Right to 
Property-after Chapter III in Part XII of the Constitution has been inserted. 
The commentary on Art. 31 is therefore transferred to Chapter 29 of this 

book. 


Saring of laws providing for acquisition of 


s, etc.— Art. 31- A. 


According to Article 3 1-A no law providing for acquisition of estate, 
etc., can be challenged on the ground that they are inconsistent with any of the 
provisions of Part III of the Constitution. They are laws for— 

(a) acquisition by the State of any estate, or 
a limited period^" 8 ° Ver ° f thc managcment of a °y property by the State for 
(c) the amalgamation of two or more corporations, 
corporations. 6 e * tinguishment of modification of rights of persons interested in 

(e) the extinguishment or modification of righs acciuing by virtue of anv 
agreement, lease or licence relating to any mineral or mineral oil. * 

*«• 31-A and further 

U, d 19 m!'”""'”"'' »hM> » , hall°not'b?c“Sl° 0 ( ^T,‘ inSni'^ArtS” 

Art°°3l! °°" challenged on the ground thatlhej Zale 


protection is not applicable to a law which seeks -to modify the right of tbe 
owner without any reference to agrarian reforms. Thus it has beenheM that 
the Land Acquisition (Madras Amendment) Act, 1961 was not a awfo 
agrarian reform and therefore not protected under Air. 31. A of the ComlitS' 
tton. The Act was not passed only to clear slum but for hmninttSSne 
aud the creation of modern suburbs and therefore could not be regfrded as 
agrarian reform. 1 6 u “ 


1. Yajaravelu v. Special Deputy Collector, AIR 1965 SC 1017. 



16] 


SAVING OF CERTAIN LAWS 


187 


Validation of certain Acts and Regulations— Article 31-B.— This Article 
was added by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951. It says that 
none of the Acts and Regulations mentioned in the Ninth Schedule shall be 
deemed to be void on the ground that such Acts or Regulations are inconsis- 
tent with any of the rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution. How 
ever, the legislature is competent to amend and repeal these Acts. But the 
validity of the amended and repealed Acts, if not saved under Article 31-A 
can be examined by the Court on merits. 1 Originally sixty-four such laws were 
added to the Ninth Schedule. It was later on amended by the Fourth and the 
Seventeenth Constitution Amendment Acts of 1955 and 1964 respectively by 
which certain more Acts were added to the Ninth Schedule. 

The Constitution (29th Amendment) Act 1972, added Kerala Land 
Reforms Act, 1969 and the Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1971 to the Ninth 
Schedule. The validity of this Amendment has been upheld by the Supreme 
Court in Kesavanand v. State of Kerala* 

The Constitution (34th Amendment) Act, 1974 amended the Ninth 
Schedule for the fouth lime and added 17 land reforms laws. With the addition 
of these Acts* the number of Acts in the Ninth Schedule rose to 86. 

It was again amended by the Constitution (39th Amendment) Act, 1975 
which added 38 Acts to the Schedule making the total number 124. The 
important Central Acts included in the Schedule were the Representation of 
Peoples Act, 1951 and the Representation of Peoples (Amendment) Act, 1974, 
the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 and the Maintenance of Internal 
Security Act, 1971 (now repealed). The Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 
1976, further added 64 Central and States Land Reforms laws to the Ninth 
Schedule. After the addition of these 64 Acts, the total number of Acts includ- 
ed in the Ninth Schedule was 188. During the discussion on the Bill in Parlia- 
ment, some members criticised the inclusion of certain Acts. The Law Minister 
justified the inclusion of these laws in the Ninth Schedule. He S3id that Art. 
31-B provides protection to not only laws of agrarian reforms but also the non- 
agrarian legislations which are progressive and required in the public interest. 
On the apprehension expressed by some members that inclusion of these Acts 
was not justified and was likely to be misused, the Minister said that there was 
no such possibility because adequate safeguards were provided in the Act. It 
is submitted that these Jaws are not laws providing for agrarian reforms and 
therefore their inclusion was not desirable and justified. On the basis of pro- 
gressive Legislation any law can be included in the Ninth Schedule and thus 
the very purpose of judicial review as provided in Art. 13 for the protection of 
fundamental rights would be frustrated. 

The 44tb Amendment Act 1978, has amended the N/nffc Schedule and 
omitted Entry 87 (the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951 of the Representation 
of Peoples (Amendment) Act, 1974, and the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 
1975 Entry 92(MISA) and Entry 130, (Prevention of Publication of Objection- 
able Matter Act, 1976). 


I Sajjan Siogh v .Stats of Rajasthan, AIR l^S SC 8 *5- 
2 . AIR 1973 SC l«t. 



XT 

Right to Constitutional Remedies 

(Arts. 352 to 35) 

“If I was asked to any particular Article in this Constitution as the most 
important— an Article without which this Constitution would be a nullity — I could 
not refer to any other Article except this one. It is the very heart of if’ — Dr. 
Ambedkar. 

Introduction. — It is true that a declaration of fundamental right is mean- 
ingless unless, there is an effective machinery for the enforcement of the rights. 
It is tbe remedy which makes the right real. If there is no remedy there is do 
right at all. It was, therefore, in tbe fitness of the things that our Constitution- 
makers having incorporated a long list of fundamental rights have also provi- 
ded an effective remedy for the enforcement of these rights under Article 32 
of the Constitution. Article 32 is itself a fundamental right. 

Article 32 (1) guarantees the right to move the Supreme Court by appro- 
priate proceedings for the enforcement of the rights conferred by Part III of 
the Constitution. Clause (2) of Art. 32 confers power on the Supreme Court 
to issue appropriate direction or orders or writs, including writs in the nature 
of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo-warranto and certiorari, for the 
enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part ill of the Constitution. 
Under Clause (3) of Art. 32 Parliament may by law empower any other court 
to exercise within the local limits of its jurisdiction all or any of the powers 
exercisable by the Supreme Court under clause (2). Clause (4) says that the 
right guaranteed by Article 32 shall not be suspended except as otherwise pro- 
vided for by the Constitution. 

Who can apply. — The right to move Supreme Court is only available to 
those whose fundamental rights are infringed. 1 2 Article 31 ( 1 ) guarantees the 
right to move Supreme Court for the enforcement of fundamental rights. It 
is clear from tbe language of Article 32 that the sole object of this Article is 
the enforcement of fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution. To 
make out a case under Article 32 it is obligatory upon the petitioner to estab- 
lish that tbe law complained affects or invades his fundamental rights guaran- 
teed by the Constitution. The power vested in the Supreme Court can only be 
exercised for the enforcement of the fundamental right* Hence, tbe Supreme 
Court cannot order the release of a person from detention on a writ of habeas 
corpus until it is satisfied that a petitioner's detention is really unwarranted 
by law. This means that in case of detention under the Maintenance of Inter- 
nal Security Act, 1971, the petitioner has to show a violation of either Article 
21 or Art. 22 of the Constitution. If he fails to show that he had been denied 
the protection of these Articles he cannot seek the remedy provided in Article 
32.® A challenge to a Government order forbidding re-appointment of com- 

1 . Io the matter of Madhu Uroye. AIR 1969 SC 1014, See also Andhra Industrial Works 
v Chief Controller, Imports, AIR 1974 SC 1539. 

2. Romesh Thapper v. State of Madras, AIR 1950 SC 124 at p. 126. 

3 Ram Bali v Stale of W. B., AIR 1975 SC 623, 



17] 


RIGHT TO CONSTITUTIONAL REMEDIES 


189 


pulsorily retired persons as a stigma is not an infringement of fundamental 
rights and, therefore, a petition under Art. 32 challenging such order is not 
maintainable. 1 2 3 The writ under which the remedy is asked under Article 32 
must be correlated with one of the fundamental rights sought to be enforced. 
In short, the remedy sought for must be through appropriate proceedings. 

Petition to enforce right under agreement or award is not maintainable 
under Article 32 of the Constitution- This article is reserved exclusively for 
the enforcement of a fundamental right. 5 6 7 

The granting of an appropriate relief under Article 32 is not discretionay. 
The citizens are ordinarily entitled to appropriate relief under Article 32, once 
it is shown that their fundamental rights have been illegally or uncoastitution- 
ally violated. 8 

The Supreme Court as protector and guarantor of Fundamental Rights.— 
Under Clause (2) of Article 32 the Supreme Court is empowered to issue 
appropriate dirrciions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of hateai 
corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo-warranto and certiorari for the enforcement 
of any fundamental right guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution. By this 
Article the Supreme Court has been constituted as protector and guarantor of 
fundamental rights and once a citizen has shown that there is infringement of 
his fundamental right the court cannot refuse to entertain petitions seeking 
enforcement of fundamental rights. 4 In discharging the duties assigned to 
protect fundamental rights the Supreme Court in the words of Patanjali Sastri, 
J, has to play a role of a sentinel on the qul w're.® Again in Daryao v. State 
of V. P.f the Supieme Court took it as its solemn duty to protect the funda- 
mental right zealously and vigilantly. 

The powers of the Supreme Court in protection of ihc constitutional right 
are of the widest amplitude and there is no reason why the Court should not 
adopt activist approach similar to Courts in America and issue to the State 
directions which may involve taking of positive action with a view to secuting 
enforcement of the fundamental right. In Hussainara Khatoon v. State of 
Bihar, 1 the Supreme Court held that speedy trial is an essential and integral 
part of the fundamental right to life and liberty enshrined in Art. 21, Id 
B ibar there were number of under-trial prisioners kept in jail for years together 
without trial. The Court ordered that all such prisioners whoes names 
were submitted to the Court, should be released forthwith. Since speedy 
trial was held to be a fundamental right guaroteed by Art. 21 the Supreme 
Court considered its constitutional duty to enforce this right of the accused 
persons. 

Extent of Supreme Court power under Article 32 (2).— The language used 
in Article 32 (2) is very wide. The power of the Supreme Court is not confined 
to issuing of writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo- 

1 . p. R. Natdu v. Government, of AP, A!R 1977 SC t J4. 

2. Al. V. Korukote v. Stale of Kerala, AIR 1977 SC 1509. 

3. Daryao v. State of UP. AIR 1961 1457. 

4. Romesh Thapper v. State of Madras, AIR I9S0 SC 124 at p. 126. 

5. State of Madras v. V. G. Row. AtR 1952 SC 196. 

6. AIR 1961 SC 1457 »t P 1461 

7. AIR 1 979 SC I***- 



X7 


Right to Constitutional Remedies 
(Arts. 32 to 35) 


“If I was asked to any particular Article in this Constitution as the most 
important— an Article without which this Constitution would be a nullity— I could 
not refer to any other Article except this one. It is the very heart of it'’— Dr. 
Ambedkar. 

Introduction. — It is true that a declaration of fundamental right is mean- 
ingless unless, there is an effective machinery for the enforcement of the rights. 
It is the remedy which makes the right real. If there is no remedy there is no 
right at all. It was, therefore, in the fitness of the things that our Constitution- 
makers having incorporated a long list of fundamental rights have also provi- 
ded an effective remedy for the enforcement of these rights under Article 32 
of the Constitution. Article 32 is itself a fundamental right. 

Article 32 (1) guarantees the right to move the Supreme Court by appro- 
priate proceedings for the enforcement of the rights conferred by Part III of 
the Constitution. Clause (2) of Art, 32 confers power on the Supreme Court 
to issue appropriate direction or orders or writs, including writs io the nature 
of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo-warranto and certiorari, for the 
enforcement of any of the tights conferred by Part III of the Constitution. 
Under Clause (3) of Art. 32 Parliament may by law empower any other court 
to exercise within the local limits of its jurisdiction all or any of the powers 
exercisable by the Supreme Court under clause (2). Clause (4) says that the 
right guaranteed by Article 32 shall not be suspended except as otherwise pro- 
vided for by the Constitution. 

Who can apply.— The right to move Supreme Court is only available to 
those whose fundamental rights are infringed. 1 Article 31 (1) guarantees the 
right to move Supreme Court for the enforcement of fundamental rights. It 
is clear from the language of Article 32 that the sole object of this Article is 
the enforcement of fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution. To 
make out a case under Article 32 it is obligatory upon the petitioner to estab- 
lish that the law complained affects or invades his fundamental rights guaran- 
teed by the Constitution. The power vested in the Supreme Court can only be 
exercised for the enforcement of the fundamental right. 2 Hence, the Supreme 
Court cannot order the release of a person from detention on a writ of habeas 
corpus until it is satisfied that a petitioner’s detention is really unwarranted 
by law. This means that in case of detention under the Maintenance of Inter- 
nal Security Act, 1971, the petitioner has to show a violation of either Article 
21 or Art, 22 of the Constitution. If he fails to show that he had been denied 
the protection of these Articles he cannot seek the remedy provided in Article 
32.* A challenge to a Government order forbidding re-appointment of cotn- 

1 . In the matter of Madhu Uroye, AIR 1969 SC 1014. See also Andhra Industrial Works 
v Chief Controller, Imports, AIR 1974 SC 1519. 

2. Fomesb Thapper v. State of Madras, AIR 1950 SC 124 at p. 126. 

3 Ram Bah v State of W, B., AIR 197S SC 623, 



I7J 


RIGHT TO CONSTITUTIONAL REMEDIES 


m 


pulsority retired persons as a stigma is not an infringement of fundamental 
rights and, therefore, a petition under Art. 32 challenging such order is not 
maintainable. ‘ The writ uodcr which the remedy is asked under Article 32 
must be correlated with one of the fundamental rights sought to be enforced. 
In short, the remedy sought for must be through appropriate proceedings. 

Petition to enforce right under agreement or award is not maintainable 
under Article 32 of the Constitution. This article is reserved exclusively for 
the enforcement of a fundamental right. 1 2 3 

The granting of an appropriate relief under Article 3 1 is not discrctionay. 
The citizens are ordinarily entitled to appropriate relief under Article 32, once 
it is shown that their fundamental rights have been illegally or unconstitution- 
ally violated. 8 

The Supreme Court as protector and guarantor of Fundamental Rights.— 
Under Clause (2) of Article 32 the Supreme Court is empowered to issue 
appropriate directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas 
corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo-warranto and certiorari for the enforcement 
of any fundamental right guaranteed by Part 111 of the Constitution. By this 
Article the Supreme Court has been constituted as protector and guarantor of 
fundamental rights and once a citizen has shown that there is infringement of 
his fundamental right the court cannot refuse to entertain petitions seeking 
enforcement of fundamental rights. 4 5 In discharging the duties assigned to 
protect fundamental rights the Supreme Court in the words of Patanjali Sastri. 
J, has to play a role of a sentinel on the qui vive. 6 Again in Daryao v. State 
ofV. P., B the Supreme Court took it as its solemn duty to protect the funda- 
mental right zealously and vigilantly. 

The powers of the Supreme Court in protection of the constitutional right 
are of the widest amplitude and there is no reason why the Court should not 
adopt activist approach similar to Courts in America and issue to the State 
directions which may involve taking of positive action with a view to securing 
enforcement of the fundamental right. In Hussainara Kiiatoon v. State of 
Bihar, 7 the Supreme Court held that speedy trial is an essential and integral 
part of the fundamental right to life and liberty enshrined in Art. 21. In 
Bihar there were number of under-trial priskmers kept in jail for years together 
without trial. The Court ordered that all such prisioners whoes names 
were submitted to the Court, should be released forthwith. Since speedy 
trial was held to be a fundamental right guarnteed by Art. 21 the Supreme 
Court considered its constitutional duty to enforce this right of the accused 
persons. 

Extent of Supreme Court power voder Article 32 (2). — Thr language used 
in Article 32 (2) is very wide. The power of the Supreme Court is not confined 
to issuing of writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo- 


1. P. R. Naidu v. Government, of AP., AIR 1977 SC 854. 

2. M. V. Kuriakose v. State or Kerala, AIR 1977 SC 1509. 

3. Daryao v. State of VP. AIR 1961 1457. 

4. Romesh Tbapper v. State of Madras, AIR 1950 SC 124 at p. 126. 

5. State of Madras v. V. G. Row, AIR 1952 SC 196. 

6. AIR 1961 SC 14S7 at p. 1461. 

7. AIR 1979 SC 1369. 



190 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


;Chap. 


warranto and certiorari. 1 2 3 4 5 These writs are all or English origin. The Supreme 
Court of India may not only issue the above writs but also directions, orders 
or writs, similar to the above so far as to fit in with any circumstances peculiar 
to India. The Supreme Court is not bound to follow the procedural tech- 
nicalities of English law, but it has been held that in granting these writs it 
will follow the broad and fundamental principles. This is clear from the 
observation made by the Supreme Court in the case of T. C. Basappa v. T. 
Nagappa * : 

“In view of the express provisions in our Constituiion we need not now 
look back to the early history or the procedural technicalities of these writs 
in English law, nor feel oppressed by any difference or change of opinion 
expressed in particular cases by fudges, we can make an order or issue a writ 
in the nature of certiorari, in all appropriate cases and in appropriate manner. 
So long as we keep to the broad and fundamental principles that regulate the 
exercise of jurisdiction in the matter of granting such writs in English law.” 

Thus, the wording of Article 32 (2) is so elastic that it permits all neces- 
sary adoption without legislative sanction from time to time so as to enable 
effective enforcement of the fundamental rights. Even if a proper writ has not 
been prayed for by the petitioner in a case his application cannot be thrown 
out. Article 32 permits large discretion to the Supreme Court to give the appro- 
priate relief. The Court can frame such writs as the exigencies of a 
particular case demand.* 

In K, K. Kochunt v. State of Madras,* the Court held that Article 32 (2) 
itself being a fundamental right if the existence of a fundamental right and a 
breach thereof, either actual or theoretical established, the Court will give relief 
notwithstanding the existence of an alternative remedy. The Court’* power 
under Article 32 (2) arc wide enough to order the taking of evidence, if neces- 
sary on disputed questions of fact, and so give appropriate relief to the peti- 
tioner by issuing the writ or order so as to suit the exigencies of the case. 

Delay or Laches.— The remedy under Article 32 must usually be sought 
within a reasonable time. If the claims made by the petitioner arc stale the 
Supreme Court cannot examine them after the delay of about a decade or 
two. This question arose for the first time in the case of Tllokchand Molichand 
v. H. B. Mumshi * The main question before the Court was whether there is 
aDy period of limitation within which the remedy under Art. 32 can be invoked. 
In the instant case tbe petitioner filed the petition in the Supreme Court after 
the lapse of 10 years after his petition under Art. 226 was dismissed by the High 
Court. The Court rejected the petitioner’s petition on the ground of delay 
However, the judges differed on the question as to what should be the reason- 
able time for invoking the remedy under Art. 32. Justice Milter favoured tbe 
application of the Limitation Art. (3 years). Sikri, J., favoured a limitation of 
one year for entertaining petitions under Art. 32. Justice Hegde, however, 
took the view that there should be no prescribed period of limitation for enter- 
taining petitions onder Art. 32. He said that the Court cannot refuse to 


1. Rashid Ahmad v. Municipal Board. Kairana, AIR 1950 SC 163. 

2. AIR 1954 SC 440 at p. 43 J. 

3. Charanji Lai v. Union of India, AIR 1951 SC 41. 

4. AIR 1960 SC 1080. 

5. TilokchaDd Motichand v. H. B. Munshi, AIR 1970 SC 898 ; RS Deodbar v. State of 
Maharashtra, AIR 1974 SC 259; I tar Swamp v. G.M., Central Rly., AIR 1975 SC 202. 



HIGH! TO CONST 1TUTJONAL REMEDIES 


191 


17 ] 

entertain a petition on the ground of delay and the provisons of the Limitation 
Act has no relevance to the proceedings under Art. 32. 

Hidayatullah, C. J., felt that no hard and fast rule can be adopted in 
this matter. He said, “The question is one of discretion for this Court to 
follow from case to case. There is no lower limit and there is no upper limit. A 
case may be brought within the Limitation Act by reason of some article but 
this Court need not necessarily give the total time to the litigant to move this 
Court under Article 32. Similarly, in a suitable case this Court may entertain 
such a petition even after a lapse of time. It will all depend on h hat the breach 
of the fundamental right and the remedy claimed are and why the delay arose : 

“The correct approach seems to be the one adopted by Chief Justice 
Hidayatullah. According to him the Court would not be bound by the analogy 
of the statute of limitations. No upper or lower limit can be prescribed for peti- 
tions under Article 32. It is a matter to be left to the sound eierrise of judicial, 
discretion. The overriding principle should be that stale claims should not 
be allowed to be agitated to the detriment of rights which have come into 
existence in the period of interregnum when the aggrieved party slept over his 
rights. Though Article 32 is itself a guaranteed right, it could not be contend- 
ed that the Supreme Court does not have the discretion to deny relief. 
Undoubtedly, Article 32 guarantees the right to approach the Supreme Court 
but that docs not restrict the Court’s discretion to grant relief. One of the 
considerations relevant for the exercise of such discretion is laches." 1 

Relation between Articles 32 and 226.— It is to be noted that under Article 
226, the High Court has also been given power of issuing writs in the nature of 
habeas corpus, etc. But the power of the High Courtis wider than the power 
conferred by Article 32 on the Supreme Court inasmuch as the High Courts have 
the power to issue writs not only for the enforcement of fundamental rights, 
but for the enforcement of rights other than fundamental rights whereas Article 
32 can be invoked only for the enforcement of fundamental rights. Parliament 
can however empower the Supreme Court with such a power under Article 139. 
But the power of the High Court to issue writs cannot be in derogation of that 
of the Supreme Court under Article 226. In other words, an order under 
Article 32 will supersede the orders of the High Court previously passed. 

An application under Article 32 may always be made first to the Supreme 
Court since Article 32 is itself a fundamental right. It is a substantive right 
not a mere procedural right. There is no need to resort to Article 226 before 
approaching the Supreme Court under Article 32. 3 

Res Judicata. — If a question has been once decided by the Supreme Court 
under Article 32 the same question cannot be re-opened s again under Article 
226. In Daryao v. State of U. P * it was held that where the matter had been 
‘heard’ and ‘decided’ by the High Court under Article 226 the writ under 
Article 32 is barred by the rule of Judicata and could not be entertained. 

But in Gulam Sarvar v. Union of India? the Court held that the rule of res 


2 . 


Alice Jacob, Laches : Denial of Judicial Relief, JILL, Vol. 16, p. 352. 

Romesh Tbapper v. Stale of Madras, AIR 1956 SC 124. 

, Jagannath Balsh Singh v. State of UP., AIR 1962 Sc 1563. 

AIR 1961 SC 14 57. See also Vinjdhunagar Steel Rolling Mills v. Government of 
Madras, AIR 196S SC 196 ; Har Swamp *. G. M-, Central Rig.. AIR 1975 SC 202. 
AIR 1967 SC 1335. 



192 


C0NST11 UTIONAC LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


judicata is not applicable in the writ of habeas corpus and where the petitioner 
has been refused a writ from the High Court he may file a petition for the same 
writ under Article 32. 

Clause (3)— Under clause (3) Parliament is authorised by law to empower 
any other court to exercise within the local limits of its jurisdiction all 
or any of the powers exercisable by the Supreme Court under Clause (2). The 
words “any other court” can only mean any other court than the High Court 
because High Courts have already been invested with such powers under 
Article 226. 

Clause (4)— According to this clause the right to move the Supreme Court 
for the enforcement of the fundamental right shall not be suspended except as 
otherwise provided by the Constitution. 

There is only one situation when this right can be suspended. When a 
proclamation of emergency under Article 352 is declared the President is em- 
powered under Article 359 to declare that the right to move any court for the 
enforcement of such right conferred by Part 111 may remain suspended for tbe 
period during which the proclamation of emergency is in operation. 

The critics say that since the right can be suspended under Article 359 
it has been robbed of its inherent and fundamental values, and it takes away 
with one hand what is given by the other. But this argument of critics is 
hardly valid in the context of our circumstances. Our fundamental rights are 
not absolute. They strike balance between the needs of the individual and the 
needs of society. In abnormal circumstances tbe life of the State itself jeopardy 
and if tbe State does not take drastic steps to protect itself tbe individual will 
lose his very existence. Hence, during emergency when the very existence 
of the State is threatened from internal or external disturbance, this fuodmen- 
tal right may by suspended. 

Restrictions of fundamental Rights of Members Armed forces. Article 

33 is an exception to the fundamental rights conferred by Part III of the 
Constitution. This Article empowers the Parliament to restrict or abrogate by 
law fundamental rights in the application to the members of the armed forces 
or the forces charged with the maintenance of public order. The power is 
conferred on Parliament and not on State Legislatures. The object of this 
restriction under this Article is to cnsuie the proper discharge of their duties 
and maintenance amongst them. 

This Article is an exception to the operation of Article 13, clause (2) 
which prohibits taking away or abridgement of the rights guaranteed by Part 
III of the Constitution. Hence, a law passed under Article 33 cannot be 
challenged under Article 13, clause (2). 

The power under Article 33 is only exercisable by Parliament* and not by 
State Legislatures. 

Restriction on Fundamental Rights while Martial Law is in force in any 
area.— Article 34 provides that notwithstanding anything in the foregoing pro- 
visions of this Part, Parliament may by law indemnify any person in the service 
of the Union or of a State or any other person in respect of any act done by 
him for the maintenance or restoration of order in any area where Martial 
Law was in force. The indemnity validates any sentence passed, punishment 
inflicted, forfeiture ordered or other act done under Martial Law in such area 

1. Dalbir Singh v. Slate of Punjab, AIR 1962 SC 1103. 



17] R1GUT TO CONSTITUTIONAL REMEDIES J93 

It offers an indemnity to members of armed forces or those (civil authorities or 
police) connected with the maintenance or restoration of order within India for 
all acts done within an area where Martial law is in force. So an Act of 
indemnity passed by Parliament cannot be challenged on the ground that it 
violates fundamental rights. 

This power of Parliament is, however, subject to two restrictions (1) the 

act must be done for the maintenance of restoration of order, and (2) Martial 
Law was in force in that area where the act was done. 

Martial Law. - In the Wharton’s Law Lexicon* Martial Law is defined as 
meaning the suspension of ordinary law and the government of the country or 
part of it by Military Tribunals. It must be clcatly distinguished from Military 
law, and (2) from the Martial Law which forms part of laws and usages of 
war. The term Martial Law is sometimes used as meaning the Common Law 
right of the Crown to repel force by force in the case of insurrection, invasion 
or riot and to make such exceptional measures as may be necessary for the 
purpose of restoring peace and order. This power is necessary, otherwise any 
act done during such time by executive or military authorities in pursuance of 
maintaining or restoring order can be challenged in ordinary court of law 
where peace is restored. This may defeat the very object for which the power 
is vested in military and civil authorities during such rime. 

The question is— Under what Article of the Constitution the Executive can 
declare Martial Law, and secondly whether the Presidential Order under 
Article 359 (1) amounts to declaration of Martial Law. 

There is no express provision in the Indian Constitution which confers 
power on the Executive to declare Martial Law. Hovever, it is implicit in the 
text of Article 34 of the Constitution under which martial law can be declared 
in any area within the territory of India.* 

In the Habeas Corpus case the Supreme Court distinguished the Presidential 
order under Art. 359 (1) and the Martial Law which may be declared under 
Art. 34. A Presidential Order under Art. 359 (l) according to Beg. J., *‘ordin> 
arily have a wide range and effect throughout the country than the existence 
of Martial Law in any particular part of the country. The Presidential pro* 
clamations are meant generally to cover the country as a whole. Martial Law 
is generally of a locally restricted application. Secondly, the conditions in 
which Martial Law may result in taking over by military court of powers even 
to try offences. Such a taking over by military courts is certainly outside the 
provisions of Art. 359(1). It could perhaps fall under Presidential powers 
under Articles 53 and 71 read with Article 355.” But declaration of martial 
law does not automatically deprive the court to issue the writ of habeas corpus 
or other process for the protection of the individual’s life and liberty. The 
court can examine the legality of the action of military or executive authorities 
on his ground of mala fide. If courts are to be prevented to exercise such power, 
during martial law, this coutdjbe done only by Presidential Order issued under 
Art. 359 (1) and in no other way.* 


1. Wharton's Law Lexicon. (!9o6) 18 Laws cd- 281 (295). 

2 Habeas Corpus case, AIR 1976 SC 1707 at p. 1318, per Bhagwati and Beg. J1 
3. Ibid., Bhagwati, J., at p. 1369. 

Const. 25 



IS 

Directive Principles oif State Policy 
(Arts. 36—51) 

Introduction. —The Directive Principles of State Policy contained in Part 
IV of the Constitution set out the aims and objectives to be taken up by the 
States in the governance of the country. This novel feature of the Constitution 
is borrowed from the Constitution of Ireland which had copied it from the 
Spanish Constitution. 

The idea of a welfare State envisaged by our Constitution can only be 
achieved if the States endeavour to implement them with a high sense of moral 
duty. 

At one time it was thought that the State was mainly concerned with the 
maintenance of law and order and the protection of life, liberty and property 
of the subject. Such a restrictive role of the State is no longer a valid concept. 
Today we are living in an era of a welfare State which has to promote the 
prosperity and well being of the people. The Directive Principles lay down 
certain economic and social policies to be pursued by the various Govern- 
ments in India ; they impose certain obligations on the State to take positive 
action in certain directions in order to promote the welfare of the people and 
achieve economic democracy. 

Underlying object behind the Directive Principles.— The Directive Principles 
are the ideals with the Union and State Governments must Keep in mind 
while they formulate policy or pass a law. They lay down certain social, 
economic and political principles, suitable to peculiar conditions prevailing 
in India. In the words of Sri G. N. losbi “they constitute a very comprehen- 
sive political, social and economic programme for a modern democratic State” 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar aptly describes them as a “novel feature” of the Cons- 
titution of India. They, in fact, inscribe the objectives of a welfare State. 
The underlying objectives of the Directive Principles can better be under- 
stood from the speech of Dr. Ambedkar in the Constituent Assembly. He 
said : 

"...Our Constitution lays down what is called parliamentary democracy. 
By Parliamentary democracy we mean .'one man, one vote’- We aUo 
mean that every Government shall be on the anvil, both in its daily 
affairs and also at the end of a certain period when the voters and the 
electorate will be given an opportunity to assess the work done by the 
Government. The reason why we have established in the Constitution 
a political democracy is because we do not want to instal by any means 
whatsoever a perpetual dictatorship of any particular body of people. 
While we have established political democracy. It is also the desire that 
we should lay down as our ideal economic democracy. We do not 
want merely to lay down a mechanism to enable people to come and 
capture power. The Constitution also wishes to lay down an ideal 
before those who would be forming the Government. That idea is 
economic democracy, whereby, so far as, I am concerned, I understand 
to mean one man, one vote. The question is, have we got any fixed 
idea as to how we should bring about economic democracy ? There 



18] 


DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY 


195 


are various ways in which people believe that economic democracy can 
be brought about ; there are those who believe in individualism as the 
best form of economic democracy ; there are those who believe in 
having a socialistic state as the best form of economic democracy ; 
there are those who believe in the communistic idea as the most perfect 
form of economic democracy. 

Now, having regard to the fact that there are various ways by which 
economic democracy may be brought about, wc have deliberately 
introduced in the language that we have used, in the directive prin- 
ciples, something which is not fixed or rigid. We have left enough 
room .for people of different ways of thinking, with regard to the 
reaching of the idea of economic democracy, to strike in their own 
way, to persuade the electorates that it is the best way of reaching 
economic democracy, the fullest opportunity to act in the way in 
> which they want to act. 

It is no use giving a fixed, rigid form to something which is not 
rigid, which is fundamentally changing and must, having regard to the 
circumstances and at times keep on changing. It is, therefore, no use 
saying that the directive principles have no value. In my judgment, the 
directive principles have a great value, for they lay down that our ideal 
is economic democracy. Because we did not want merely a parliamen- 
tary form of Government to be instituted through the various mecha- 
nism provided in the Constitution, without any direction as to what 
our economic ideal or as to what our social order ought to be, we 
deliberately included the Directive Principles in our Constitution. 

I think if the friends who arc agitated over this question bear in mind 
what I have said just now that our object in framing this Constitution 
is really two- fold (1) to lay down the form of political democracy and, 
(2) to lay down that our idea! is economic democracy and also to 
prescribe that every Government whatsoever is in power, shall strive 
to bring about economic democracy." 1 

Thus, it is clear that the main object in enacting the directive principles 
appears to have been to set standards of achievements before the Legislature 
and the Executive, the local and other authorities, by which their success or 
feilure can be judged. It was also hoped that those failing to implement the 
directives might receive a rude awakening at the polls. It should, however, 
be noted that the directive principles do cot impose any particular brand 
or pattern of economic or social order. They lay down the goals which may 
be achieved through various means which have to be devised from time to 
time. 

Classification of the Directives. — The Directives may be classified into the 
following groups : 

A— Social and Economic Charter 

1. Social order based on justice.— Article 38 (1) provides that the State 
shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting 
as effectively as it may a social order in which justice— social, economic and 
political shall inform all the institutions of national life. This directive only 
reaffirms what has already been said in the Preamble according to which the 
function of the Republic is to secure to all its citizens social, economic and 
political justice. 

J. Constituent Assembly Debates. Vol. Mil. rP 4W-9J 



196 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


The Constitution ( 4ith Amendment) Act, 1978 has inserted a new directive 
principles in Article 38 of the Constitution. The new clause (2) provides that 
the State shall, in particular, strive to minimise inequalities in income and 
endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status facilities and opportunities not only 
amongst individuals but also amongst groups of people residing in different 
areas or engaged in different vocations. 

2. Principles of Policy to be followed by the State for securing economic 
justice.— Article 39 specifically requires the State to direct its policy towards 
securing the following principles : — 

(a) Equal right of men and women to adequate means oflivelihood. 

(b) Distribution of ownership and control of the material resources of 
the community to the common good. 

(c) To ensure that the economic system should not result in concentra- 
tion of wealth and means of production to the common detriment. 

(d) Equal pay for equal work for both men and women. 

(e) To protect health and strength of workers and tender age of children 
and to ensure that they are not forced by economic necessity to enter 
avocations unsuited to their age or strength. 

(f) That children are given opportunities and facilities to develop in a 
healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that 
childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and against 
moral and material abandonment. 

Clause (f) was modified by the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 
1976 with a view to emphasise the constructive role of the State with regard 
to children. The changes made by the amendment does not change the 
content and the spirit of unamended clause (f). The object intended to be 
achieved by the amendment could have been fulfilled even under the unamend- 
ed clause (f) of Art. 39. 

3. Equal justice and free legal aid to economically backward classes. 1 — 
Article 39-A directs the State to ensure that the opreation of the legal system 
promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunities and shall, in particular, 
provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any other way, 
to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen 
by reason of economic or other disabilities. With a view to implement the 
new policy of the Government to give legal aid to economically backward 
classes of people, the amendment has been enacted. 

4. Participation of workers in management of Industries. 1 — Art. 43-A 
requires the State to take steps, by suitable legislation or in any other way, 
to secure the participation of workers in the management of undertakings, 
establishments or other organisations engaged in any industry, 

5. Right to work, education and public assistance in certain cases. — 
Article 41 directs the Stale to ensure to people within the limit of its economic 
capacity and development : (a) employment. <b) education, and (c) public 
assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness, aod disablement and 
in other cases of undeserved want. 


J. Added by the 42nd Amendmsnl, 1976. 



6 Just and human condition of work.— Ait. 42 directs the State to 
make provison for securing just and human conditions and for maternity 
relief. 

7 Living wage for workers— Art. 43 requires the State to try to secure 
bv suitable legislation or economic oragnisation or in any other way to all 
wolkers, agrtailturiil, industiials ot olhtrwist. work a living wage, conditions 
of work ensuring a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of e, sure end 
social and cultural opportunities, and in paiticular, the Stale shall endcasour 
to promote cottage industries on an individual or co-operauve basis m rural 
areas. 

8 Free and compulsory education for childera— Art 45 requires the 
State to make provision within 10 years, for free and compulsory education for 
all children until they complete the age of 14 years. The object ts to abolish 
illiteracy from the country. 

9. Duty to raise the standard of bring ond improvement of health.— Art. 
47 imposes duty upon the State to raise the leval of nutrition and the standard 
of living of its people and the improvement of public health. In particular, 
the State should bring about prohibition of the consumption except for 
medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious 
to health. 

10 Promotion of educational and economic interests of weaker 
section — Art 46 enjoins the State to promote with special care the education 
and economic interest of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular 
of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and to protect them from social 
injustice and of all forms of exploitation. 

11 Uniform Civil Code— Art 44 requires the State to strive to secure 
for the citizens a uniform Civil Code throughout the territory of India. 

12. Organisation or agriculture and animal husbandry.— Art. 48 directs 
the State to take step to organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern 
and scientific lines. In paiticular. it should take steps for preserving and 
improving the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter of cows and calves and 
other milch and draught cattle. 

13 Protection and Improvement of forests and wild life. — Art. 48-A 
requires the State to take steps to protect and improve the environment and to 
safeguard tbe forests and wild life of the country. 

14 Protection of monuments and places and objects of national Impor- 
tance— Art. 49 requires the State to protect every monument or place or 
obiect or artistic or historic interest (declared by or under law made by Parlia- 
ment), to be of national importance from spoliation, disfigurement, destruction, 
removal, disposal or export. 

15 Separation of Judiciary from Executive.— Art. 50 requires the State 
to take steo to separate the Judiciary from the Executive in the public services 
of the State. To promote the rule oflaw. this is very essent.aL 

16 Promotion of International peace and security.— Art. 51 provides 
that the'State should strive to (a) promote international peace and security; 
|S maintain just and honourable relations between nations ; (c) foster respect 
for Tntcrnauonal law and treaty obligations m the dealings of organ .sed 
tuples with one another and <d) encourage settlement of international 
disputes by arbitration. 



198 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


Relation between Directive Principles and Fundamental Rights 

The directive principles differ from fundamental rights in the following 
aspects : 

(l) Fundamental Rights are justiciable, directives, non-justiciable. 

According to Article 37, Directive Principles, though they are funda- 
mental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the State 
to apply these principles in making law, are expressly made non-justiciable. 
The fundamental rights are enforceable by the courts. 1 and the courts are 
bound to declare as void any law that is inconsistent with any of the funda- 
mental rights. The Directive Principles on the other hand, are not so enforce- 
able by the courts, 2 nor can the courts declare as void any law which is 
otherwise void on the ground that it contravenes any of the directives. For 
instance, if a person is illegally detained, a writ of habeas carpus can be 
obtained by the detenue. But, if the Government does not separate judiciary 
from the executive or introduce free and compulsory education the courts 
cannot help the aggrieved. In State of Madras v. Champakam Darairajan, 3 4 5 the 
Supreme Court observed as follows : 

“The Directive Principles of the State Policy, which by Article 37 are 
expressly made unenforceable by Court cannot override the provisions found 
in Part III which, notwithstanding other provisions, are expressly made, 
enforceable by appropriate writs, orders or directions under Article 32. The 
Chapter of Fundamental Rights is sacrosanct and not liable to be abridged by 
legislative or executive act or orders, except to the extent provided in the 
appropriate Articles in Part III. The Directive Principles of State Policy have 
to conform and to run as subsidiary to the Chapter of Fundamental Rights. In 
our opinion that is the correct approach in which the provision found in 
Parts Ul and IV have to be understood. However so long as there is no 
infringement of any fundamental right to the extent conferred by the provi- 
sions in Part III, there can be no objection to the State acting in accordance 
with the directive principles set out in Part IV, but subject again to the legisla- 
tive and executive powers and limitations conferred on the State under different 
provisions.” 

Thus in cate of any conflict between fundamental rights and Directive 
Principles fundamental rights shatl prevail. But a year later, when the court 
dealt with Zamindari Abolition cases its attitude was considerably modified. In 
the State of Bihar v. Kameshv/ar Singh* the Court relied on Article 39 in 
deciding that a certain Zamindari Abolition Act had been passed for a public 
purpose within the meaoing of Article 31. Finally, in Re Kerala Education Riff, - ' 
the Supreme Court observed that though the directive principle cannot override 
the fundamental rights, nevertheless in determining the scope and ambit of 
fundamental rights the court may not entirely ignore the directive principles 
but should adopt ‘‘the principles of harmonious construction and should 
attempt to give effect to both as much as possible”. Likewise, State should 
make cattle protection laws prohibiting slaughter of cows and calves and other 
cattle have been upheld because they are meant to give effect to Article 48 of 


1. Article 32. 

2. Article 37. 

3. AIR. 1931 SC 22$. 

4. AIR 1932 SC 352. 

5. AIR 1937 SC 956. 



18] 


DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OP StATH POLICV 


199 


the Constitution. 1 2 Again, Article 44 has been referred to in upholding validity 
of the Excise Rules empowering the Central Government to grant exemption 
from payment of duty to small co-operative societies of weavers producing 
cotton fabrics on powerlooms. 3 While Part III contains negative injunctions 
to the State not to do various things. Part IV contains positive commands 
to the State to promote what may be called a social and welfare State. 

Though these directives are not enforceable by the courts, yet these 
principles have been declared to be fundamental iu the governance of the 
country. 3 It is the duty of the State to apply these principles in making Jaws. 
If any Government ignores them they will certainly have to answer for them 
before the electorate at the time of election. The directive principles are not 
intended to be merely moral precepts was made clear by Dr. Ambedkar when 
he said : 

“If any Government ignores them, they will certainly have to answer 
them before the electorate.” 

U is, therefore, not correct to criticise these principles as meaningless and 
useless. It is wrong to say that there is no sanction behind them. In this age 
of democracy vigilant public opinion is the real force behind an institution 
which stands for the benefit of the individual. The Government in a parlia- 
mentary system Is under a constant fire of criticism. The actions of the 
Government arc subject to scrutiny by the masses and the distinguished leaders 
of the different parties. If the Government pursues a policy in accordance with 
the principles of the Constitution, people tolerate it, otherwise they oust it in 
the next elections. Since the Directive Principles have been embodied in the 
Constitution, the Government are apt to implement them. They may not be 
the legal force behind them but the highest tribunal— the public opinion- 
stands behind them. No Government can afford to ignore these directives, if 
it is not keen to doom its future for all time to come. 4 5 6 

There is no anti-thesis between the Fundamental Rights and the Directive 
Principles. They are meant to supplement one another. Granville Austin s has 
described the fundamental rights and the directive principles as the “consiecce 
of our Constitution”. Shelat and Grover, JJ. in Keshas anand B/iartis 0 case 
observed, “Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles are meant to 
supplement one another. It can well be said that the directive principles 
prescribed the goal to be attained and the fundamental rights lay down the 
means by which that goal was to be achieved. 

The Directive Principles are also relevant to consider what are reasonable 
restrictions under Article 19. Article 19 permits the imposition of reasonable 
restrictions on the fundamental rights. A restriction which promotes any 
objective embodied in the Directive Principles is usually considered reasonable 
by courts of law. Thus, in the Stale of Bombay v. Balsara , 7 the Supreme 
Court gave weight of Article 47 which directs the State to bring about prohibit 

1. Mohd. Hanif Quraishi v Slate of Bihar, AIR 1958 SC 731. 

2. Orient Weaving Mills v. Union of India, AIR 1963 SC 98. 

3. Article 37. 

4. Constitutional History of India and Indian Constitution by Vishnu Bhagwan, 1969, 
pp. 73-74. 

5. Cornerstone of a Nation (Indian Constitution) by Granville Austin, p. 7J. 

6. AIR 1973 SC 1461. 

7. AIR 1951 SC 318 at p. 329. 



200 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


tion of consumption of intoxicating drinks except for medical purposes— to 
support its decision that the restriction imposed by the Bombay Prohibition Act 
was a reasonable restriction on the right to engage in any profession or carry 
on any trade. In Bijoy Cotton Mills v. State of Ajmer , 1 2 the Supreme Court up- 
held the constitutional validity of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, by taking 
into consideration (Article 43). In the opinion of the Court, the fixation of 
wages for labourers did not violate freedom of trade under Article 19 (5). Shri 
M. C. Setalwad (Ex-Attorney-Gencral of India) has beautifully summed up 
the utility of the Directive Principles in this field : 

“these fundamental axioms of State policy though of an effect have 

served as useful beacon light to courts Restrictions imposed by law 

on the freedom of citizens may well be reasonable ff they ate imposed in fur- 
therence of the directive principles.”* 

Ait. 31-C and Directives.— Art. 31-C was added to the Constitution 
by tbe Constitution 25th Amendment, 1971. This Amendment has considerably 
enhanced the utility of Directive Principles. The first part of Article 31-C 
provides that no law which is intended to give effect to the directive principles 
contained in Arts. 39 (b) and (c) shall be deemed to be void on the ground that 
it is inconsistent with or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by 
Articles 14, 19 or 31 (Art. 31 has been deleted by 44th Amendment Act.1978) of 
the Constitution.The second part of Art. 31-C provided that “no law containing 
a declaration that it is for giving effect to such policy can be called in question 
on the ground that it does not in fact give effect to such policy.” 

Thus, the Amendment for the first time placed the Directive Principles 
contained in Article 39 (b) and (c) above fundamental rights. The validity of 
first part of Article 31-C had been upheld in the Fundamental Rights case. 3 
But the second part of this Article, which barred the judicial scrutiny of laws 
passed to give effect to directives contained in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39, 
was declared unconstitutional. 

Art. 31-C was again amended by the 42nd Amendment Act, 1976. The 
Amendment lias widened the scope of Art. 31-C so as to cover all directive 
principles. For this purpose, the amendment has substituted the words, “all 
or any of the principles laid down in Part IV” for the words “the principles 
specified in clause (b) or (c) of Article 39” in Article 31-C of the Constitution. 
The amendment thus gives precedence to all the directive principles over the 
fundamental rights or citizens. If a law is enacted for giving effect to any 
of the directives mentioned in Part IV its validity cannot be challenged in the 
Courts on the ground that it is inconsistent with or takes aways or abridges 
any of the rights guaranteed by Articles 14, 19 or 31 of the Constitution. 
However, the Court will still have power to examine whether the law is really 
intended to give effect to directives, to achieve some other purpose. 

Art. 31-C, according to the objects of the Amendment, was necessary to 
achieve the “socio-economic reform” or “revolution, which would end poverty 
and ignorance". On behalf of tbe Government it was said that this has been 
done in order to restore the primacy of the Directive Principles over the Fuuda- 
menal Rights as was intended by the framers of the Constitution. But this 
assertion is wrong as it is clear from the discussion in the Assembly that 

1. AIR 1955 SC 33. 

2. Quoted in Constitutional History of India by Vishnu Bhagwan, 1969, p. 76. 

3. Kesavanand v. State of Kerata, AtR 1973 SC 1461. 



20) 


DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY 


201 


the framers did not intend to give the Directive Principles any primacy over 
the Fundamental Rights. On the other hand, they made the Fundamental 
Rights, justiciable rights (Art. 13) and the Directives non-justiciable rights. 
(Art. 37). The intention of the framers of the Constitution as reflected from the 
discussion in the Assembly and the final draft, therefore is that both the- gools 
of individual liberty and social welfare should be achieved by reading them 
together, without silencing either of them. No Court could possibly say, in 
the face of Arts. 13 and 37 that non-jucticiable rights should prevail over the 
justiciable rights. 1 

Recently, in the case of Minerva Mills v. Union of India (unreported) 2 the 
Supreme Court by 4 to I majority has struck down Art. 3 1C as unconstitutional 
on the ground that it destroyes the "basic features” of (he Constitution. The 
Court held that Art. 31 C is beyond the amending power of the Parliament 
and is void since it destroys the basic features of the Constitution by a total 
exclusion of challenge to any law on the ground that it is inconsistent with or 
takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by Arts. 14 or 19 of the 
Constitution. The Court will give its reasons later on. The decision of the Court 
is in accordance with the spirit of the Constitution. There is no conflict 
between the Directive Principles and the Fundamental Rights. They are 
complementary to each other. It is not necessary to sacrifice either of them 
for the sake of the other. As described by Gramvill Austic, the fundamental 
rights and the directive principles are the “Consience of our Constitution”. 
It can well be said that the directive principles prescribed the goal to be 
attained and the fundamental rights lay down the means by which that goal 
is to be achieved. 

Implementation of Directives Guided by the Directives the Central and 

the State Governments have tried to the best of their resources to implement a 
large number or Directives. Under Article 39 (b) the Governments have 
abolished the old institution of hereditary proprietors, such as Zamindars, 
Jagirdars, etc. and made the tillers of the soil real owners of the land. This 
reform has, by this time, been carried out almost completely throughout India. 
Side by side with this, laws have been enacted in many States for the improve- 
ment of the condition of the cultivators. In order to prevent concentration of 
land holdings even in actual cultivation maay States have enacted legislation 
fixing a ceiling, that is to say, a maximum area of land which may be held by 
an individual owner. Untouchability, the age-old curse of the Indian Society, 
has not been made an offence punishable by law. The Government has fixed 
minimum wages for our workers, modernised our labour laws and improved 
the conditions of labour. A large number of laws have been enacted to imple- 
ment the directives contained in Article AO. Panchayats have been established 
in the remotest villages of our country. They have been vested with the powers 
of civil administration, such as, medical relief, maintenance of village roads, 
streets, tanks and wells, provisions for primary education, sanitation and the 
like. They also exercise some judicial powers. For the promotion of cottage 
industries the Government has established several boards, viz. All India Khadi 
aDd Village Industries Board, Small Scale Industries Board, Silk Board, AH 
India Handicrafts Board, AU India Handloom Board, etc. Many States have 
passed laws for compulsory education. Slaughter of cows and calves in some 
of the States have been prohibited. In some States as Anhhra Pradesh, Gujarat, 

1. D.D. Basil, Constitutional Law of India. 1977 edition, p. xlvi. 

2. The Hindustan Times. May 12, 19SO. 

Const. 26~N. 



CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


202 


[Chap. 


Haryana, Punjab, Kerala, Madras, Mysore and Maharashtra Judiciary has 
been separated from the Executive. 

After the 1921 Lok Sabba mid-term poll the Congress Government came 
forward with much more radical policies towards implementation of the Direc- 
tive Principles. Fourteen major banks of the country were nationalised. 
Privy purses and privileges of the princes were abolished. The privileges of 
I. C. S. Officers were taken away. The Constitution was amended by the 25th 
Amendment Act, 1971, so as to enable the Government to implement more 
speedily socio-economic reforms. This Amendment added a new . article : 
Article 31 -C to Article 31 of the Constitution. The new Article provides that 
no law which is intended to give effect to the principles contained in Articles 
39-B and 39-C, shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent 
with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by Acritcles 14, 19 
or 31 of the Constitution. The validity of the 25th Amendment Act had been 
upheld by the Supreme Court in the Fundamental Rights case . ' 

This amendment, according to the Government, was made to facilitate the 
socio-economic reforms to be introduced by the Government. It was alleged 
that courts were standing in the way of implementing the Directive Principles 
and hence the amendment became necessary. 

It is submitted that this allegation is untenable. In an interesting article 
Mr. Justice K. S Hegde of the Supreme Court of India has said : “There is no 
truth in the allegation that the Courts are standing in the way of implementing 
the Directive Principles. No judicial pronouncement has impeded the imple- 
mentation of the Directive Principles contained in Articles 40 to 51. One may 
ask whether any judicial pronouncement come in the way of the State in 
implementing the mandate contained in Article 44 requiting the State to secure 
to the citizens a uniform Civil Code throughout the territory of India— a man- 
date of consid.rable significance for consolidating and strengthening the nation. 
1 am not aware of any judicial pronouncement which has come in the W3y of 
the State securing equal pay for equal work for both men and women and 
protecting the health and strength of workers *. men and women. Nor has any 
judicial decision interfered with the duty of the State to see that the citizens arc 
not forced by economic necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age or 
strength and the childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and 
against moral and meterial abandonment.” Then referring the complaint that 
some or the decisions 1 * * * of the Supreme Court have impeded the efforts of the 
State to secure and protect a just social order he said ; “This complaint is an 
ill-informed one. While the Constitution has laid down that the State shall 
strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as effec- 
tively as it may, a social order in which justice social, economic and political, 
shall inform all the institutions of the national life : it has also prescribed the 
method by which the social order contemplated should be achieved. 8 Jn view 
of these observations, it is submitted that the Constitution (25th Amendment) 
Act was not at all necessary. 

Though much has been achieved still much more is to be achieved. 
Political influences and economic and social disparities still exist, standard of 
living of the people is yet to be laised. Unemployment is yet to be implemented. 
But with all this it can be safely concluded that efforts of Government of the 
Union and of States are really very encouraging and substantial in the imple- 
mentation of these objectives. 

I. Kesavanand v. State of Kerala, A. I. R 1973 S. C. 1461. 

2- The Bank Tfatiooahsatio iCase and The Privy Purse Case The 25th Amendment wa s 

enacted after these decisions of the Supreme Court. 

3- Northern India Patnka, 24tb March. 1971. 



19 

Fundamental Duties 
(Article 51-5.) 

The new Part IV-A which consisits of only one Article 5 1 -A was added to 
t he Constitution by the 42nd Amendment, 1976. _ This attic e for the first time 
loeclfies aCode of tea fundamental duties for etttzens. Att.cla 51-A says tbat 
it shall be the duty of every citizen of India— 

(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the 

National Flag and the National Anthem ; . t J , 

(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national 

struggle for freedom ; . 

(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India ; 

(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon 

t0 d ° feT ’to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst 
nil the neonk: of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sec- 
tional 6 diversities ; to renounce practices derogatory to the d.gmty of women ; 
(f> to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture ; 

M to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, 
lakes rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures ; 

(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry 

and reform ; , . . . , 

(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence ; 

in to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective 
activity so that Urn nation constantly rises to higher level, of endeavour and 
achievements. 

Need for Fuodametal Duties.-Rights and duties are ^relative. 

, , , V, t i« arc therefore, intended to serve as a constant reminder to 

fundamental duties, V-. " lbe Oonstitution sepcifically conferred on them certain 
every citizen that while the ^“^Vitizens to observe certain basic norms of 
and' democratic behaviour. It was claimed by the ruling 
democratic conduct what , he fram ers failed to do is being done now. 

party, the Congress \ providing a Chapter on the citizen s duties. 

It'was^argued 13 thatlnfofha* pcoplc'lay Emphasis 0.1, on tights and no. 
on duties. „ «... 

11 i! tsft •££%?£%»£* SCCfif-S 

accordance with the or 0Dts do , y , 0W ards society, the country and 

“Kattavya . thaUS. penor and Ram ayana enjoin people 10 

g£ftEtS£SS^«»« their right, or (fn.it,>. 

^ j’linn.l duties have been given constitutional sanction. “If one 

These traditionaldut^aw fa t £ constitution not only his rights but 
lakes cate to see, he wm ^ Constilu , io n will also thus answer the complaint 
also his duties n i 



204 


C0N5TTTUTTONAI. LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


of some persons that Constitution has conferred rights on the individual but has 
not set out the duties of the individuals towards the society. 1 2 By the Preamble 
the Constitution secures to all the citizens : “liberty of thought, expression, 
belief, faith and worship.’* These are fundamental rights of the citizens. The 
rest of the preamble emphasis only the duties, '“justice, social, economic and 
political*’. In addition to this, the fundamental rights guaranteed by the 
Constitution are not adsolute rights. The State is empowered to impose reason- 
able restriction and curtail these rights in the interests of society. Restrictions 
may sometimes amount to ‘prohibition’.* 

Source of fundamental duties. — It is significant to note that none of the 
constitutions of western countries specifically provide the duties and obligations 
of citizens. Among the democratic constitutions of the world, we find mention 
of certain duties of the citizens in the Japanese Constitution. In Britain, Canada 
and Australia the rights and duties of citizens are governed largely by Common 
law and judicial decisions. The French Constitution makes only a passing 
reference to duties of citizens. The American Constitution provides only for 
fundamental rights and does not refer to duties of citizens. It does not mean 
that the people of these countries behave iu an irresponsible manner. In all 
these countries the citizens are imbued with a high sense of patriotism as a 
result of education and training in the elementary duties and obligations of 
citizenship. 

The Constitution of Socialist countries however lay great emphasis on the 
citizens' duties. Article 32 of the Yugoslavian Constitution lays down, “The 
freedom and rights shall be achieved in solidarity among the people by the 
fulfilment of their duties towards each other.” Article 36 says, “The right to 
work and the freedom to work are guaranteed and whoever will not work, 
though he is fit to do so, shall not enjoy the rights and the social protection that 
man enjoys on the basis of work”. Article 66 lays down, “Every citizen shall 
conscientiously discharge any public or social office vested in him and shall be 
personally accountable for discharging it” 

But among the Socialist countries, the Soviet Constitution contains a com- 
prehensive Chapter oo the citizen’s duties. Chapter X of the Soviet Constitution 
lays down fundamental rights and duties. Article 130 of the Soviet Constitution 
lays down, "It shall be the duty of every citizen of the USSR to abide by the 
Constitution of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to observe the laws, to 
maintain labour discipline, honesty to perform public duties, and to respect the 
rules of the Socialist community". Article 131 lays down, “It is the duty of 
every citizen of the USSR to safeguard and fortify public socialist property as 
the sacred and inviolable foundation of the Soviet system, as the source of the 
prosperity and culture of all the working people.” Persons committing offencers 
against public socialist property are enemies of the people. Article 1 32 makes 
military service compulsory, which says universal military service in the Armed 
Forces of the USSR is an honourable duty of the citizens of the USSR. Article 
133 says, “It shall be the sacared duty of every citizen ofthe USSR to defend 
the country.” Treason to the motherland, violation of the oath of allegiance, 
desertion to the cmemy, impairing the military power of the State, espionage is 
punishable with all the severity of the law as the most heinous of crimes. 

Thus the Soviet Constitution imposes upon the people definite duties to* 
wards society and towards the State. These duties can be summed up as follows 

1. V. S. Deshpande : Rights and Duties under the Constitution. 3. t. L. I., Vol. 15, p. 95. 

2. Narendra v. Union of India, AIR I°60 SC 430. 



19] 


FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES 


205 


observance of the Constitution and laws to maintain labour discipline, honest 
performance of public duties, respect for the rules of socialist society 
which govern conduct of citizens in relation to society and each other, 
safeguarding of public socialist property, universal military service and defence 
of the country. 

Like the Soviet Constitution, Chapter II of the Constitution of the Re- 
public of China lays down specific duties upon Ibe people. Article J 38 Jays 
down, "Citizens of the USSR have the right to work, that is, the right to 
guaranteed employment and payment for their work In accordance with its 
quantity and quality.” 

It is interesting to note that while all the aforesaid constitutions speci- 
ally lay down duties of the people, they also guarantee the ‘right to work* 
to every citizen. This is an important omission in the Indian Constitution 
even to-day. Poverty is a curse. Necessity knows no law. A poor, an un- 
employed cannot be expected to perform his duties towards the society if the 
society fails to discharge its obligation towards individuals. The right to work 
should therefore be guaranteed to every citizen, who are expected to do certain 
duties to the Nation. 

Enforcement of duties.— The duties incorporated in the Constitution by the 
42nd Amendment are statutory duties and shall be enforceable by law. Parlia- 
ment, by Jaw, will provide penalties to be imposed for failure to fulfil these 
duties and obligations. The success of this provision would, however, depend 
much upon the manner in which and the persons against whom these duties 
would be enforced. 

For the proper enforcement of duties, it is necessary that it should be 
known to all. This should be done by a systematic and intensive education of 
the people, that is, by publicity or by making it a part of the syllabi and cur- 
riculum of education. The Law Minister has himself suggested Ibis. Most of 
the people of this country are illiterate and not politically conscious of what 
they owe to society and country. Homes, Universities, offices and their places 
of work should all be made centres for imparting training in the performance 
of their obligations. 



20 

The Union Executive, The Presi- 
dent, Vice-President and 
Council of Ministers 
(Arts. 52-78 and 123) 

Parliamentary form ot Government.— In India, tbe Constitution establishes 
a parliamentary form of Government as distinguished from the American Presi- 
dential type of Government. The essence of tbe parliamentary type of govern- 
ment is that the head of the State is the constitutional head and the real execu- 
tive powers are vested in the Council of Ministers. The Prime Minister is the 
head of the Council of Ministers. The Council of Ministers is responsible to the 
House of the People. Though the executive power is vested in the President 
but he exercises this power with the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers. 
The members of the Council of Ministers are all elected by the people and 
they are members of the Legislature. 

THE PRESIDENT 

Article 52 of the Constitution says that there shall be a President 
of India. He is the head of the Government. The executive power of the 
Union, Article-53 says, shall be vested in the President and it shall be exercised 
by him in accordance with the Constitution cither directly or through officers 
subordinate to him. It has been held in Emperor v. Siinat/i Banerji '*• that 
the expression ‘officers subordinate to him, includes a minister also’. The 
expression 'executive power’ is not defined in rhe Constitution. Article 73 
provides that the executive power of the Union shall extend to the matters with 
respect to which Pailiament has power to make laws and includes the exercise 
of such rights, authority and jurisdiction as are exercisable by the Government 
of India by virtue of any treaty or agreement. Thus the executive power of the 
Union which is exercisable by tbe President is co-extensive with the legislative 
powers of the Union. In Ram Jo* ay a v. Stale of Punjab? tbe Supreme Court 
has considered the meaning and scope of the executive power. Tbe Court said, 
“It may not be possible to frame an exhaustive definition of what executive 
functions means and implies. Ordinarily, the executive power connotes the 
residue of Governmental functions that remain after legislative and judicial 
functions are taken away.” The executive power is not confined merely to 
administration of laws but it includes determination of the Government policy, 
initiation of legislation, maintenance of law and order, promotion of social and 
economic welfare, the direction of foreign policy, in fact, the carrying on or 
supervision of the general administration of the State. The executive power 
of the Union however does not extend to a matter in the Concurrent List 
unless (1) expressly provided in the Constitution itself, e. g. Articles 256, 257, 
298, 353 and 356, or (2) expressly entrusted by a law made by Parliament. 
Clause (2) of Art. 73 is an exception to the rule laid <5owd in clause (1). This 
clause provides that until otherwise provided by Parliament, a State may conti- 
nue to exercise cxeculive'power on matters {now included in the Union or Con- 
current List) which it was authorised to exercise before the commencement of 
the Constitution. It should not, however, encraoch upon any legal or funda- 
mental rights of the citizen. 

I. AIR 1945 P. C. 156 al P. 163. 

J. AIR 1955 SC 549. 



20 ] 


TT1P UNION EXECUTIVE 


207 


1. Qualifications. — Article SS lays down the qualifications which a 
person must possess for being elected to the Office of the President of India : 

(a) He must be a citizen of India. 

(b) He must have completed the age of 35 years. 

(c) He must be qualified for election as a member of the House of 
the People (f. e., he must be registered as a voter in any Parliamentary Consti- 
tuency).* 

(d) He must not hold any office of profit under the Government of India 
or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject 
to the control of any of the said Governments. 

But the following persons shall not be deemed to hold any office of pro- 
fit and hence qualified for being a candidate for Presidentship. They ary (a) 
the President and Vice-President of the Union, (b) the Governor of any State, 
(c) the Minister of the Union or of any State.* 

2. Conditions of President’s Office —According to Art. 59 of the Con- 
stitution the President cannot be member of either House of Parliament or 
of a House of the Legislature of any State If a member of either House of 
Parliament or of a State Legislature is elected President he shall be deemed to 
h3ve vacated his seat in that House on the date on which he enters upon his 
office as President. The President shall not hold any other office of profit. 

3. Salary and Emoluments.— The President shall be entitled to use his 
official residence free of rent. He is also entitled to such emoluments, allow- 
ances and privileges, as may be determined by Parliament. His salary at 
present is fixed at Rs. 10,000 per month. His salary and allowances cannot 
be diminished during his term of office.* Od the expiration of his term or 
resignation, the President is entitled to an annual pension of Rs. 15,000.* He 
is permitted to spend a total amount of Rs. 13,26,000 a year on travel, 
entertainment, discretionary grants, staff, household expenses and his own 
allowances. 

Election of President. — The President of India is not directly elected 
by the people. Art. 54 provides that the President shall be elected by an 
electoral college consisting of : — 

(a) the elected members of both Houses of Parliament ; and 

(b) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States. 

The nominated members of the above Houses at the Centre and the 

States do not have voting rights in the election of the President. The election 
of the President shall be held in accordance with the system of proportional 
representation by means of the single transferable vote. 6 The system adopted 
for voting is secret ballot . The Constitution provides as far as practicable 
there shall be uniformity in the scale of representation among different States 
inter se as well as parity between the States as a whole and the Union at the 
election of the President. 8 

J. Section 4, Representation of the People Act, 1951. 

2. Article 58. 

3. Article 59 (3). 

4. President’s Pension Act, 1951. 

5. Article 55 (3). 

6. Article 55 (!) 



CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


208 


[Chap. 


In order to secure uniformity among the States and parity between the 
Union and States the following formula is adopted : 

Every elected member of the Legislative Assembly of a State shall have 
as many votes as there are multiples of 1000 in the quotient obtained by 
dividing the population of the State by the total number of the elected raew- 
bets of Assembly. The number of votes which each M- L. A. of a State 
Legislative Assembly gets is as follows : 

Population of the State 1 


Total number of elected members of the State 1000 

Legislative Assembly 

If by this division the remainder is 500 or more it will be counted as one and 
the vote of each member is increased by oae. Thus the number of votes which 
a M L. A. is entitled to cast in the presidential election is based on the ratio 
of population of the State. 

The number of votes which each elected member of Parliament is entitled 
to cast shall be obtained by adopting the following formula ; 

Total number of votes of M. L. A. ’s of State Assemblies. 


Total number of elected members of both Houses of Parliament. 

If by this division the remainder exceeds one-half it will be counted as 
one. This formula secures parity of votes between the members of Parliament 
and of tbe Legislative Assemblies of the States. 

The illustration given below will mike above formula clear. Thus 
suppose the population of Bombay is 203,49.840. The total number of elect- 
ed members of the Bombay Legislative Assembly is 208 (one member represent- 
ing one lakh of population). 

How to obtain the number of votes which every member will get is to 
divide 208,49,840 (population of Bombay) by 208 (total number of elected 
members of the State) and then to divide the quotient by 1000, i. e., 

20849840 100.239 

+ 1000 = 100 (rejecting the remainder 

208 1C0O 

239 being less than 500.) 

Thus each member of Bombay Legislative Assembly will get 100 votes 
and the total votes cast by Bombay Legislative Assembly would be : 

= 100x208 = 20,800. 

How suppose the total number of votes of elected members of Legislative 
Assembly of all States in accordance with the above calculation is 74,940 and 
the total of elected members of both the Houses of Parliament is 750. The 
number of votes which each member of Parliament is entitled to cast would 
74,940 23 23 

be =99 (since the fraction — exceeds one half it will be counted 

750 25 25 

as one), and will be added to the total numbers /. e., 99 + 1 = 100. 

Under the Constitution, the election of the President must be held in 
accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the 
single transferable vote. The system adopted for voting is seciet ballot. The 
voting system works in following manner : 



20 ] 


TUB UN JON EXBCUIIVE, BTC. 


2oy 

Let u$ suppose that there are 4 candidates A, B, C, D, and the total 
number of valid votes is 15,000. A candidate must secure at least 7,501 tirst 
preference votes, that is, more than half the valid votes— to be declared elected. 
In the first count A, B, C, D, have polled as follows : 

A— 5,250 

B — 4.SOO / 

C— 2,700 V Total 15,000 

D -2,200 ) 

Here no candidate has secured a miomum of 7501 votes. In this case 
D having obtaiaed the least number of votes would be the first to be eliminated 
and the second preference votes recorded in his favour will be transferred to 
the remaining candidates A, B and C. Suppose that the second preference 
votes recorded in the votes of D are as follows A— 300, B— 1050 and C— 
900. These would be transferred and added to the first preference votes in 
favour of A, B, C as follows : 

A— 5250 +300 = 5550. 

B — 4S00+ 1050 *= 5850. 

C— 2700+900 -3600. 

Even in the second count no candidate could secure a minimum of 7501. 
Here C having obtained the least number of votes is eliminated and (he third 
preference votes recorded in his favour will once again be transferred to A 
and B. Suppose the third preference votes on the ballot paper recorded in 
favour of A and B are 1700 and 1 900, respectively. The result of (his second 
transfer would be as follows : 

A-5550 + 1700 =7250. 

B- 5850 +1900 = 7750. 

In this illustration, B having obtained the maximum votes, that is, more 
than half of the valid votes, will be a successful candidate though he had 
secured fewer first preference votes than A. 1 

This process will be repeated again and again till a candidate secures 
more than half the valid votes. 

The electoral college as envisaged in clause 2 of this Article is to be 
readjusted after each new census. The expression 'population* in this Article 
means the population as ascertained at the previous census. The 42nd Amend- 
ment Act, 1976. has amended this Article and added a new explanation 
which provides (hat the number of seats in Lok Sabha and the State Assemblies 
will be determined on the basis of the 1971 census, and will be frozen till the 
year 2000. This means that there will be no increase in the electoral college 
till the year 2001. This has been done in accordance with the new population 
policy of the Government. 

5. Disputes regarding the election — Article 7 1 provides that all doubts 
and disputes arising out of or in connection with the election of the President 
or Vice-President shall be ‘inquired’ into and ‘decided* by the Supreme Court 
whose decision shall be final. But if the election of a President or Vice-Presi- 
dent is declared void by tbs Supreme Court acts done by President or Vice- 
President in the exercise of their powers before the date of the decision of the 

1. The Hindustan Times, 1969. 

Const. 27 



2io coNSUTutioNAt Law of india [Chap 

Supreme Court, 1 shall not be invalidated by reason of that declaration. 
Further, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may by I3W 
regulate any matter relating to the election of the President or Vice-President. 2 3 4 5 
Clause (4) of Art. 71~makes it clear that the election of the President or Vice- 
President cannot be called in question on the ground that there exists any 
vacancy for whatever reason in the electoral college electing him. 

In Dr. N. B. Khare v. Election Commissioner of India.* the petitioner 
challenged the holding of the election on the ground that since the general 
election in certain parts of Punjab and Haryana had not taken place till that 
time and the electoral college (as envisaged by Articles 54 and 55) for that 
purpose would be incomplete, therefore the election of the President should 
take place only after that. The court held that the election of the President 
could only be challenged after the completion of the election, i. e., after the 
candidate is declared elected. 

Clause (4) of Article 71 which was added by the Constitution (Eleventh 
Amendment) Act, 1961, makes it clear that the election of the President or 
Vice-President cannot be challenged on the ground that there exists any 
vacancy in a particular electoral college for whatever reasons. 

After the election was over, in Dr. N. B. Khare v. Election Commissioner 
of India* be again challenged the validity of the election. The Court held 
that since under section 14 of the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Act an 
election can only be questioned by a candidate at such election or by 10 or 
more voters therefore Dr. Khare who was neither a candidate nor an elector 
was not entitled to challenge the validity of election of the President. 

To discourage light minded persons from contesting Presidential and Vice- 
Presidential elections Parliament has amended the Presidential and Vice-Presi- 
dential Election (Amendment) Act, 1974, which now provides that name of 
the Presidential candidate must be proposed by at least 10 electors and be 
seconded by 10 electors and the name of Vice-Presidential candidates must be 
proposed by 5 electors and be seconded by 5 electors. A Presidential and Vice- 
Presidential candidate is also required to deposit 'a security deposit of two 
thousand and five hundred rupees. 

In in re. Presidential Election * the holding of the election of the President 
was again challenged on the ground that the electoral college as mentioned in 
Articles 54 and 55 would be incomplete because the Gujarat State Legislative 
Assembly was dissolved. It was contended that the Presidential election should 
be postponed until fresh elections are held in the State of Gujarat 

The Supreme Court held that the election to the office of the President, 
must be held before the expiration of the term of the President, notwithstand- 
ing the fact that at the time of such election the Legislative Assembly of a State 
is dissolved. The election to fill the vacancy of the office of the President is to 
be held and completed having regard to Articles 62 (1), 54, 55 and the provi- 
sions of the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections Act, 1952. Only such 
persons who are elected members of both Houses of Parliament and the 
Legislative Assemblies of the States on the date of the election to fill the 

1. Article 71 (2). 

2. Art. 71 (3). 

3. AIR 1957 SC 694 : 1957 SCR 1031. 

4. AIR 1958 SC 139 : 1953 SCR 648. 

5. AIR 1974 SC 1682. 



20] THE UNION EXECUTIVE, ETC. 21 1 

vacancy caused by the expiration oF the term of office of the President will be 
entitled to caste their votes at the election. Article 56 (1), Proviso (c) applies 
to a case where successor has not entered on his office and only in such 
circumstances can a President whose term has expired, continue. Article 56 
(1), Proviso (c) and Art. 62(1) should be read together to give effect to the 
constitutional intent and content that the election to fill the vacancy caused by 
the expiration of the term of the President must be completed before the 
expiration of the term. The elected members of a dissolved Legislative Assem- 
bly of a State are no longer members of the electoral college as provided in Art. 
54 and, therefore, they are not entitled to cast votes at the Presidential election. 
The vacancies caused by the dissolution of an Assembly or Assemblies will be 
covered by Article 71 (4). The Court said that Article 71 (4) was really intro- 
duced in 1961 to shut out any challenge to the election on the ground that 
there was any vacancy among members of the electoral college. The language 
of Art. 71 (4) is of wide amplitude, dz. existence of any vacancy for any 
reasons whatever among the members of the electoral college. It will take 
in any case where a person who as an elected member of the House of Parlia- 
ment or the Legislative Assembly of a State became entitled to be member 
of the electoral college but ceased to be an elected member at the relevant date 
of the election and therefore became disentitled to cast vote at the election and 
that vacancy among members of the electoral college was not filled up. 

The Supreme Court, however, refrained from expressing any opinion on 
the question as to what would happen if there is a “ mala fide dissolution” of 
a State Legislative Assembly or Assemblies or if there is, after the dissolution 
of the Assmebly or Assemblies a mala fide refusal to hold election, thereto 
within reasonable time before the Presidential election. Likewise, it did 
not express any opinion on the effect of the dissolution of a substantial member 
of the State Legislative Assemblies before tbe Presidential election. 

6. Oath by the President — According to Article 60, before entering upon 
bis office, the President has to take an oath or an affirmation in the presence 
of the Chief Justice of India, and in his absence the seniormost Judge of the 
Supreme Court, ‘ to preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law 
and to devote himself to the service and well-being of the people of India,'. 

7. Term of Office of the President. — Article 56 says that the President 
shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon 
his office. Even after the expiry of his term he shall continue in office until 
his successor enters upon his office. He is also eligible for re-election. He 
may be elected for any number of terms. But in America after 22nd Amend- 
ment of the U. S. A. Constitution a person cannot be elected to the office 
of the President more than twice. The President in India may, however, resign 
his office before the expiry of his normal term of five years by writing to the 
Vice-President. He may be removed from his office for the violation of the 
Constitution by the process of impeachment. 

8. Procedure for Impeachment of the President. — Article 61 of the Consti- 
tution lays down the procedure for the impeachment of the President. The 
President can be removed from his office by a process of impeachment for the 
'violation of the Constitution*. The impeachment charge against him may be 
initiated by either House of Parliament. The charge must come in the form 
of a proposal contained in a resolution signed by not less than 1 ^4th of the 
total number of the members of the House and moved after giving at least 
14 days advance notice. Such a resolution must be passsed by a majority of 
not less than 2/3rd of the total membership of the House. The charge is then 



212 coNSTmmoNAt iaw of India Chap. 

investigated by the other House. The President has right to appear and to be 
represented at such investigation. If the other House after investigation passes 
a resolution by 2/3rd majority declaring that the charge is proved, such reso- 
lution shall have the effect of removing the President from bis office as from 
the date on which the resolution is so passed. 

Under Art. 11, section 4 of the American Constitution, the President and 
all Civil Officers of the Untited States can be removed from office on impeach- 
ment for, and conviction of, ‘’Treason, Bribery, or other high crimes and 
misdemeanours". Jo America the power to initiate the impeachment proceed- 
ings lies with the Lower House which appoints a committee to investigate the 
charges. The findings of the House are then sent to the Senate for action. 
The Senate which hears the Impeachment is presided over by tbe Chief Justice 
of tbe Supreme Court of America. If the Senate by 2/3rd majority of the 
members present at the trial agrees to the charges, tbe president is convicted 
and removed. 

9. Privileges of the President. — Article 361 of the Constitution guarantees 
tbe following privileges to the President : 

(1) Tbe President shall not be answerable to any court for the exercise 
and performance of the powers and duties of his office or foe any act done or 
purporting to be done by him in the exercise of those powers and duties. 
However, tbe conduct of the President may be brought undjr review by any 
court, tribunal or body appointed or designated by either Houses of Parliament 
for the in\e«tigation of the charge in impeachment proceedings. Thus the 
immunity afforded to the President will not restrict the right of any person to 
bring suits against the Government of India. 

{1) No criminal proceedings whatsoever shall be instituted and continued 
against the President in any court during his term of office. 

(3) No process for the arrest or imprisonment of the President shall be 
issued from any court during his term of office. 

(4) No civil proceedings in which relief is claimed against (he President 
shall be instituted during his term of office in any court in respect ol any act 
done or purporting to be done by him in his personal capacity whether before 
or after he bad entered upon his office until (a) a notice in writing has been 
given to the President, fb) two months have passed after tbe service of such 
notice, and (c) the notice states the nature of proceedings, the cause of action, 
the name, residence and description of the party taking the proceedings and 
the relief claimed. 

10. Filling tbe casual vaeanty.— According to Article 62 (2) an election to 
fill a vacancy in the office of President occurring by reason of his death, resig- 
nation or removal or otherwise shall be held as soon as possible and in no 
case later than six months from the date of occurrence of the vacancy, the 
vacancy is filled up by election. Article 65 (1 ) provides that the Vice-President 
shall act as the President. If the Vice-President is not available for any of 
the above reasons, the Chief Justice of India and the seniormost Judge of the 
Supreme Court available will be in the line of succession to discharge the func- 
tion of the President. 1 

In In re Prsidential Election case, 1 the question which was referred to the 

1. President Succession Act, 1969. 

7. AIR 1974 SC 1682, 



20 ] 


THE UNION EXECUTIVE, ETC. 


213 


Supreme Court for its'opiuion was whether the election to fill the vacancy 
caused on the expiry of the term of office of the President must be completed 
before the expiry of the term of office notwithstanding the fact that the Legis- 
lative Assembly of Gujarat was dissolved. The Court held that the election 
to fill the vacancy in the office of the President must be held before the expir- 
ation of the term of the President having regard to articles 62 (1), 54 and 5S 
of the Constitution. 

The Vice-President.— There shall be a Vice-President of India. 1 The Vice- 
President is elected by the members of both Houses of Parliament at a joint 
session by secret ballot in accordance with the system of proportional represen- 
tation by means of single transferable vote. The qualifications of the Vice- 
President are the same as those of the president except that he must be eligible 
for election to the Rajya Sabha. 2 3 4 The term of the Vice-President is five years. 
He may, however, resign from his office before the expiry of the normal term, 
or may be removed by a resolution or the Rajya Sabba passed by a simple 
majority of all the then members of the House and agreed to by a simple 
majority of the Lok Sabha 8 

Functions of the Vice-President. — The Vice-President of India shall be 
officlo Chairman of the Rajya Sabha.* His normal function is to preside over 
meetings of the Rajya Sabha. But since he is not the member of (he Rajya 
Sabha, he has no right to vote. 

His importance in the Constitution is that whenever any vacancy occurs 
in the office of the President, he acts as President ' until a new President is 
elected. 

POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT 

Executive Powers.— The Constitution has conferred extensive executive 
powers on the President. The executive power of the Union of India is vested 
in him. He is the Head of the Indian Republic. All executive functions 
are executed in the name of the President, and authenticated in such manner 
as may be prescribed by rules to be made by the President (Article 77). He 
has power to appoint the Prime Minister and on his advice other Ministers 
of the Union, the Judges of the Supreme Court, and the High Courts, the 
Governors of the States, the Attorney-General, the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General, the Chairman and Members of the Public Service Commission, the 
Members of the Finance Commission and Official Commissions, Special Officer 
for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, Commission to report on the 
administration of Scheduled Areas Commission to Investigate into the con- 
ditions of backward classes. Special Officer for linguistic minorities. 

The President shall have power to remove his Ministers, the Governors, 
the Attorney-General, Judges and Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Chair- 
man and Members of the Un<on Public Service Commission and that of the 
State Public Service Commission , though in accordance with a prescribed pro- 
cedure. It is to be noted that he has to exercise his executive powers on the 
advice of the Prime Minister who is the head of the Council of Ministers. 

Military powers— The President is the Supreme Commander of the 

I. Article 63. 

2 Article 66(3) <c). 

3. Article 67. 

4. Article 64. 



214 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA [Chap. 

Defence Forces of the country. He has powers to declare war and peace. 
However the exercise of these powers by the President is “regulated by law”. 
The Parliament is empowered to regulate or control the exercise of the military 
powers by the President. The military power of the President is thus subotdi* 
nate to his executive power which is exercisable by him on the advice of the 
Prime Minister. 

Diplomatic powers. — As the Head of the State, the President sends and 
receives Ambassadors, and other diplomatic representatives. All treaties and 
international agreements are negotiated and concluded in the name of the 
President though subject to ratification by Parliament, 

Legislative Powers —The President of. India is a component part of the 
Union Parliament. In theory he possesses extensive legislative powers. He 
has power to summon and prorogue the Parliament and be can dissolve the 
Lak Sabha. Article 85 (1), however, imposes a restriction on this power. The 
President is bound to summon Parliament within six months from the last 
sitting of the former session. If there is a conflict between the two Houses of 
Parliament over an ordinary Bill he can call a joint sitting of both Houses, 
to resolve the deadlock. 1 At the commencement of each session the Presi- 
dent addresses either House of Parliament or a joint session of a Parliament. 
In his address to a joint session of Parliament he outlines the general policy 
and programme of the Government. His speech is like that of the king in 
England and is prepared by the Prime Mioistcr. He may send messages to 
either Houses of Parliament. 2 3 

Every bill passed by both Houses of Parliament is to be sent to the Presi- 
dent for bis assent. 9 He may give his assent to the bill, or withhold his assent 
or in the case of a bill other than a money bill, may return it to the House 
for reconsideration on the line suggested by him. If the bill is again passed 
by both the Houses of the Parliament with or without amendment, he must 
give his assent to it when it is sent to him for the second time. A bill for the 
recognition of a new State or alteration of State boundaries can only be intro- 
duced in either House of the Parliament after his recommendation. 4 5 The 
State Bills for imposing restrictions on freedom of trade and commerce 
require his recommendation. 6 

He nominates 12 members of the Rajya Sabha from among persons hav- 
ing special knowledge or practical experience of Literature, Science, Art and 
Social Services (Art. 80 (3)1. He is authorised by the Constitution to nominate 
two Anglo-Indians to the Lok Sabha, if he is of opinion that the Anglo-Indian 
community is not adequately represented in that House (Art. 331). 

The President has to lay before the Parliament the Annual Finance® 
Budget, the report of Auditor-General, the recommendations of the Finance 
Commission, report of the Union Public Service Commission, and reports of 
the Special Officer for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, the report of 
the Commission of the backward classes and the report of the Special Officer 
for linguistic minorities. 


1. 'Art. 103. 

2. Art. 86. 

3. Art. 111. 

4. Art. 3. 

5. Art. 304. 

6. Art. 112. 



20 ]' >• 


THE UNION EXECUTIVE, ETC. 


215 


Tbc Ordinance-mating power of the President— Article 123.— The most 
important legislative power of the President is his Ordinance-making power. 
If at any time, when both Houses of the Parliament arc not in session and the 
President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him 
to take immediate action, he may issue such Ordinance as the circumstances 
appear to him to require. The Ordinances issued by him shall have the same 
force as an Act of Parliament. Such Ordinances, however, must be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament and shall cease to operate, at the expiry of six 
weeks from the date of re-assembly of Parliament, unless a resolution disap- 
proving it is passed by both Houses before the expiration of six weeks. The 
President may, if he likes, withdraw such an Ordinance at any time. 

The Ordinance making power is exercised by the President on his own 
•satisfaction’. The court cannot inquire into the reasons for the subjective 
satisfaction of the President or into the sufficiency of those reasons.* However, 
in R. C. Cooper v. Union of India* the Supreme Court had observed that in 
issuing Ordinances the satisfaction of the President is not final. But the court 
did not specify as to when it will interfere. 

An Ordinance can be issued only when both the Houses of the Parlia- 
ment are not in session. It follows from this that an Ordinance can be issued 
when only one House is in session because a law cannot be passed by one 
House alone. 

It is to be noted that the ‘satisfaction* is not the personal satisfaction of 
the President. In reality, it is the satisfaction of the Cabinet on whose advice 
the President exercises his Ordinance-making power. 

The Ordinance-makiDg power of the President is co-extensive with the 
legislative power of the Parliament, that is to say, that it may relate to any 
subject in respect of which Parliament has power to legislate. Hence, an 
Ordinance will be viod in so far as it makes any provision which under the 
Constitution, the Parliament is not competent to make (Article 123 (3)]. Thus 
an Ordinance cannot violate the fundamental rights. 

In no country, except India, the Executive is vested with legislative power. 
The Indian Constitution expressly confers power to make Ordinances on the 
President. The power to make Ordinances is justified on the ground that the 
President must be armed with powers to meet with serious situation when the 
Houses of Parliament are not in session. It is rot difficult to imagine the cases 
when ordinary law-making powers may not be able to deal with a situation 
which may suddenly and immediately arise. In such circumstances, the execu- 
tive must have power to take immediate action by issuing Ordinances. 

With all the constitutional safeguards, there is possibility of abuse of the 
Ordinance-making power by the Executive. 

The Pardoning power. — The President has power to grant pardons, rep- 
rieves, itvpVititT mmsstoras of pvnwsbt&tTft ©s suspend, sc®. 1 .', ox cQ.ra.ro.ute 
lhe sentence of any person convicted of any offence (1) by Court Martial ; (2) 
an olTence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power 
of the Union extends ; or (3) in all cases in which the sentence is one of death. 
(Article 72). The object of conferring this "judicial" power on the President 
is to correct possible judicial errors, for no human system of judicial adminis- 

I Pr*m Narain v. Suit of U. T., AIR I960 AIL 205 ; Duperor v . Beooiri Lai Shirtnj. 

AIR 1945 P C 4*. 

2. AIR 1970 S.C. 564- 



216 


CONS TITUTIONAL UIW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


tratioa can be free from imperfections. 1 A pardon completely absolves the 
offender from all sentences and punishments and disqualifications and places, 
him in the same position as if he had never committed the offence. Commu- 
tation means exchange of one thing for another. Here it means substitution 
of one form of punishment for another of a lighter character, e. g. for rigo- 
rous imprisonment— simple imprisonment. Remission means reduction of the 
amount of sentence without changing its character, e. g. a sentence of one 
year may be remitted to six months. Respite means awarding a lesser punish- 
ment on some special grounds, e. g. the pregnancy of a woman offender. 
Reprieve means temporary suspension of death sentence, e. g. pending a pro- 
ceedings for pardon or commutation. 

In America, the President can grant pardons for offences against United 
States, except in cases of impeachment. 2 In Nanavati's case, 3 the Supreme 
Court held that in view of the language of Arts. 72 and 161, which was similar 
to that used in section 295 (2) of the Government or India Act, 1935, and 
also similar to that used in Art. 2. Section 2 of the American Constitution, 
the President and the Governors, in India had the same powers of pardon both 
in its nature and effect, as it enjoyed by the King in Great Britain and the 
President in the United States. The pardoning power therefore, can be exer- 
cised before, during and after trial. 

The distinction between the pardoning power of the Governor and the 
President has been discussed in detail under the Chapter entitled “The State 
Executive". 

The power to pardon is exercised by the President on the advice of the 
Council of Ministers. 

Emergency powers.— Part XVIII (/. e.. Articles 352 to 360)* of the Con- 
stitution arms the President with enormous emergency powers. The emergen- 
cies envisaged under the Constitution are of three kinds : (1) emergency arising 
out of war, external aggression for armed rebellion, (2) emergency due 
to failure of constitutional machinery in the State, and (3) financial emer- 
gency. 

If the President is satisfied that the security of India is threatened by 
foreign attack, armed rebellion or war 4 5 6 or if either on the receipt of report 
of the Governor of the State or otherwise he is satisfied that a situation has 
arisen in which the Government of a State cannot be carried on io accordance 
with the Constitution 11 or a situation has arisen whereby the financial stability 
of India is threatened® he may proclaim an emergency. A proclamation of 
emergency may be revoked by a subsequent proclamation. Such a proclama- 
tion must be laid before each House of Parliament and ceases to operate at 
the expiration of one month unless approved by the two Houses The President 
may, during the period of emergency suspend the right to move the courts for 
the enforcement of fundamental rights, 7 * * (except Art. 21 and 22). He may 

1. Basu : Introduction to the Constitution of India, 3rd Edition, 1964, Part 11, p. 21. 

2. Artvelt H, 'fts.tvaa 2 of the Arnwfcsa. Constitution. 

3. A1R1961 S.C. 112. 

4. Article 3S2 (I). 

5. Article 3S6 (l). 

6. Article 360 (I). 

7. Article 359. 

* Emergency Provisions have been vitally modified by the 44th Amendment Act, 1978 

See Relevant Chapter. 



20] TUB UNION EXECUTIVE, ETC. 21? 

give directions to any State as to the manner in which the State should 
exercise its executive powers. 

In case of the emergency arising out of constitutional failure of machi- 
nery in the State the President may assume any of the powers vested in the 
Governor. The power of State Legislature shall be exercised by or under the 
authority of Parliament. Such a proclamation ceases to operate at the expiry 
of two months unless approved by both Houses of State Legislature. 1 
Under the proclamation of financial emergency the Union Government may 
give such financial direction to the State as it deems fit. The President may 
direct the reduction of salaries of any class of State officials, the Judges of 
the Supreme Court and the High Courts. He may require all State money 
bills to be reserved for consideration of the President. 

The emergency powers of the President has been discussed in detail in 
Chapter 33 of the book. 


POSITION OF PRESIDENT 

Prior to the 42 Amendment Act of 1976. — Article 53 (l) says that the 
executive power of the Union shall be vested in the President and shall be 
exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in 
accordance with the Constitution. Originally, Article 74 provided that there 
shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head, to aid 
and advise the President in the exercise of his functions. Article 74 (2) says 
that the question whether any, and if so. what advice was tendered by the 
Ministers to the President shall not be enquired into in any court. Article 
75 says that the Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and the 
other Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the 
Prime Minister. The Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
President.’ 

Now, a purely literal and legalistic interpretation of these articles con- 
veys the impression that the President, if he so desires, can become a dictator. 
Article 53 (1) leaves a clear scope for the President, ir he chooses, to become a 
real ruler and not to remain mere nominal head or the Union It is true that 
there shall be a Couocil of Ministers with a Prime Minister as a head to aid 
and advise him in the exercise of his executive powers. But prior to the Consti- 
tution [42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 there was no clear ptovision in the Cons- 
titution that the President was bound by the ministerial advice. Consequently, 
Allen Gladhill 1 was of the view that the Constitution could under certain 
circumstances make the President a dictator. He can easily manage to seize all 
executive powers by dissolving the Parliament and declaring state of emergency 
thereby suspending fundamental sights. As a Supreme Commander of the 
Armed Forces, he can use miliiao'. to suppress the civil forces. Evert without 
violating the Constitution, an ambitious President can become the real ruler of 
India. 4 


|. Articles J56. J57. 

2. Article 75 (2>. 

j Allen Gladhill— The Republic of India, p. 107. 
e. Constituent At'embly Debates. Vol. VII, p. 31. 
Const. 28 



218 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF JNDIA . 


tCbap. 


This literal interpretation is not in tune with the spirit of the Constitution. 
No sane President would like to be so ambitious as depicted by 
Gladbill. None can dispute the fact that the form of Government adopted by 
the Constitution is a Parliamentary one. It is the essence of the Parliamentary 
Governments that the real executive powers should be exercised by the Council 
of Ministers responsible to the Lok Sabha. The President cpnot exercise his 
powers without the aid and advice of a Council of Ministers, i. e., the existence 
of a Council of Ministers is obligatory. According to Dr. Ambedkar ; 

•‘Under the Draft Constitution the President occupies the same position as 
the King under the English Constitution. He is the Head of the State but not 
of the Executive. He represents the nation but does not rule the nation. He 
is the symbol of the nation. His place in the administration is that of a cere- 
monial device on a seal by which the nation’s decisions are made known. He 
will be generally bound by the advice of the Ministers. He can do nothing 
contrary to their advice, nor can do anything without their advice.” 

The President of the Constituent Assembly, Dr. Rajendra Prasad, express 
ed a similar view in these words ^ 

“Although there is no specific provision of the Constitution itself making 
it binding on the President to accept the advice of his ministers, it is hoped that 
the convention under which in England the King always acted on the advice of 
his ministers, would be established in this country also and the President would 
become constitutional President in all matters." 

The Supreme Court of India has consequently taken the view that the 
powers of the President and the Governors are similar to the.powers of the 
Crown under the British Parliamentary system. 

In Ram Jawaya v. State of Punjab , x the Court observed, “Under Article 53 
(1) of our Constitution the executive power of the Union is vested in the Presi- 
dent but under Article 74 there is to be a Council of Ministers with the Prime 
Minister as the head to aid and advise the President in the exercise of his func- 
tions. The President has thus been made a formal or constitutional head of 
the Executive and the real executive powers are vested in the Ministers or the 

Cabinet In the Indian Constitution, therefore, we have same system of 

Parliamentary Executive as in England, and the Council of Ministers consisting, 
as it does, of the members of the Legislature is, like the British Cabinet “a 
hyphen which joins, a buckle which fastens the legislative part of the State to 
the executive part”. The cabinet enjoying, as it does, a majority in the Legis- 
lature, concentrates in itself the virtual control of both legislative and executive 
functions ” 

In U. N. Rao v. Indira Gandhi ,* the Supreme Court held that even after 
the dissolution of the Lok Sabha the Council of Ministers docs not cease to 
hold office. Article 74 (1) is mandatory, and. therefore, the President cannot 
exercise the executive power without the aid and advice of the Council of 
Ministers. Any exercise of executive power without such aid and advice 
will be unconstitutional in view of Article 53 (1). The facts ofthe case were as 
follows After the dissolution of the Lok Sabha the Prime Minister, Indira 
Gandhi, and her Council of Ministers continued to hold office. The appellant 


1. AIR I9SS S. C. 519 
1970 S.C 1102 at p. 
C. 1551. 

2. AIR 1971 S. C. 1002. 



220 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Chap. 


opinions of judicial aulhorillcsand previous decisions of lbe Supreme Court the 
court said, “our Constitution embodies generally the parliamentary or cabinet 
system of Government on lbe British Model, both for the Union and the States. 
It is a fundamental principle of English Constitutional law that Ministers must 
accept responsibility for every executive act. In England the sovereign never 
acts on his own responsibility, the power of the sovereign is constituted by 
the practical rule that the Crown must find advisers to bear responsibility for 
his action. Those advisors must have the confidence of the House of Com- 
mons. This rule of English Constitutional Law is incorporated in our Con- 
stitution. 

The Court also overruled the judgment delivered in case of Sardari Lai v. 
Union of India, 1 in which it had held that : 

“Where the President or Governor, as the case may be, if satisfied makes 
an order under Article 3 U (2) proviso (c) the satisfaction of the president or 
Governor is his personal satisfaction." 

The framers of the Indian Constitution relied more on constitutional con- 
ventions which had developed in England and therefore they did not make 
any specific provision that the President was to be bound to accept the advice 
of the Council of Ministers. However certain important safeguards have also 
been incorporated in the Constitution which support the view that the Presi- 
dent was never intended to be cither a dictator or an autocrat. They arc 

(1) The Council of Ministers is responsible to the Lok Sabba. If the 
President ignores the advice of Minister enjoying the confidence of a Parliament 
it may resign and create a constitutional crisis. It is obligatory on the Presi- 
dent to have always a Council of Ministers. If the same person again gains 
majority and forms a Ministry it would be diflicul £ for the President to work 
with that ministry. 

(2) If be dismisses any ministry having solid support of Lok Sabha, they 
may bring impeachment proceeding against ihe President. This power of 
impeachment of Parliament serves as a deterrent against the President assum- 
ing real power, 1 

(3) The power of taxation, legislation and appropriation of funds from 
Consolidated Funds can be made only by Parliament’s authorisation. 

(4) The working of the Constitution since 1950 has established that 
President is a nominal Head and the real executive power vests in the Council 
of Ministers. 

After the 42nd Amendment Act, 1976.— This amendment now removes all 
doubts about position of the President under tbc Indian Constitution. It has 
amended Art. 74 of the Constitution which makes it dear that the President 
shall be bound by the advice of the Council of Ministers. It says, “theta 
shall be a Council of Minister* with the Prime Minister at the head to aid 
and advice the President who shall, in exercise of his functions act in accordance 
with such advice.’’ 

In view ol the Constitution 42nd Amendment Act, 1976 the President 
could not play even the role of an advisor or a guide. 

t. AIR 19T| SC 1S47. 

2 Gladhill— Republic of India, Commonwealth Services, p. 100, 



20 ] 


THE UNION EXECUTIVE, ETC. 


221 


44th Amendment Act, 1978.— This amendment has insetted the following 
proviso in clause (1) of Article 74 : 

“ Provided that the President may require the Council of Ministers to re-con- 
sider such advice, either generally or otherwise, and the President shall act in 
accordance with the advice tendered aftar such reconsideration 

This Amendment is intended to prevent the recurrence of the situation 
which arose in 1975 when President had to sign the Emergency proclamation 
only on the advice of the Prime Minister Indira Gandhi without consulting her 
Cabinet Colleagues. 

It is submitted that it would have never been the intention of the framers 
of the Constitution to make the President a puppet. Though they were clear 
that the President would be a constitutional head, but they never intended that 
he would be a passive spectator. In view of the oath which he takes under 
the Constitution “to preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the 
law and that I will devote myself to the service and well being of the people 
of India” he is duty bound to advise, to guide and exert his influence on the 
decision taken by the Prime Minister. Indeed, this is the real spirit of the 
Constitution and .it is hoped that the holders of that highest office would 
always abide by it. 

The 44th Amendment recognises this limited, but essential role of the 
President, under the Indian Constitution. 

But the weak position of the President does not mean that bis office is 
superfluous. He is the symbol of Indian National Unity. He plays a vital role 
io the working of the Government. Being impartial and above party politics, 
he exerts or is likely to exert his influence on the decisions of the Prime 
Minister. The influence of the President, however, will depend on his sterling 
character, magnetic personality and selfless devotion to the nation. 

In the ultimate analysis, Dr. M. P. Jain observes, it is the Council of 
Ministers which will prevail and not the President. The President's role at 
best may be advisory, he may act as the guide, philosopher and friend to 
Ministers, but cannot assume to himself the role of their master— a role which 
is assigned to the Prime Minister. 1 

Indian President and American President. — The American President is the 
real executive head and is directly responsible to ibe people of his country. 
While Indian President is the nominal head, the real Executive is the Council 
of Ministers. 

The members of the cabinet are appointed by the President in America 
arc responsible to him. In India, the President has no choice but to appoint 
the leader of the majority party in the Lok Sabha as (be Prime Minister. 

Dr. Amtedkar, the Chairman of (he Dcsftiag Committee, summed up (he 
true position of Indian President in the following words : 

"In the Draft Constitution there is placed at the head of the Indian 
Union a functionary who is called the President of the Union. The 
title of the functionary reminds one of the Presidents of the United 
States. But beyond identity of names there is nothing in common 
between the form of Government prevalent in America and the 
form of Government proposed under the Draft Constitution. The 

t. Jam. M. P— Indian Conniiuiiocsl Law. 



CON'STITUHONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


American form of Government is called the Presidential system of 
Government, what the Draft Constitution proposes is the Parlia- 
mentary System.” 

Under the Presidential System of America, the President is the Chief head 
of the Executive. The administration is vested in him. Under the Indian 
Constitution the President occupies the same position as the King under the 
English Constitution. He is head of the State but not the Executive. He re- 
presents the nation but does not rule the nation. His place in the administra- 
tion is that of a ceremonial device on a seal by which the nation’s decisions 
are made known. 1 

Thus his position is more comparable to the King or Queen in England 
than to the President of America. 

THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS 

Originally, Article 7411) provided that “there shall be a Council of 
Ministers with the Prime Minister as its head to aid and advice the President 
in the exercise of his functions”. After the 42ad Amendment, 1976, the lang- 
uage of Art. 74 (1) is as follows — "There shall be a Council of Ministers with 
the Prime Minister as its bead to aid and advice the President who shall, in 
exercise of his functions, act in accordance with such advice." According to 
Article 75(1), the Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and 
other Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the 
Prime Minister. 

The Council of Ministers consists of three categories of Ministers,— 
Cabinet Ministers, Stale Ministers and Deputy Ministers, The Cabinet rank 
Ministers are the heads of their departments. All Cabinet Ministers are not 
members the Cabinet. They attend the meetings of the Cabinet when specially 
invited by the Prime Minister and when the matter concerning their depart- 
ment is discussed by the Cabinet. The Ministers of State are formally of 
Cabinet status and are paid the same salary as the Cabinet Ministers and 
they hold independent charge of their departments. 2 The Deputy Ministers 
are paid lessor salary than the Cabinet rank Ministers and have no separate 
charge of a Department. Their task is to assist the Ministers with whom they 
are attached to in their administrative duties. 

The Cabinet is the smaller body of the Councilor Ministers. Though 
the Indian Constitution nowhere mentions the word Cabinet but it does 
incorporates the essentials of a Cabinet system of British Government. In 
Britain, the Cabinet is a child of chance and is essentially based upon conven- 
tions, i. e., unwritten rules. The Cabinet is thus an extra-constntutional 
growth based upon convention. The Cabinet is the supreme policy- 
making body. The Council of Ministers never meet as a whole and it never 
discusses policy matters. Ail seniormost Ministers are the members of the 
Cabinet. 



20 } 


TUB UNION EXECUTIVE, BTC. 


22 } 


he must become member of Parliament within the period of six month*. If he 
is not elected within tbc time mentioned above be is bound to resign from 
the legislature. Before a Minister enters his office, the President shall 
administer to him the oath of office and of secrecy. 1 2 3 4 5 

The Ministers shall hold oflke during (he pleasure of the President.* 
The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as Parliament may from 
time to lime by law determine. 8 

The Constitution of India thus mates it obligatory for the President to 
appoint a Council of Ministers and he must exercise his functions with the 
aid and advice of the Ministers. The relations between the President and 
the Council of Ministers are confidential because Art. 74 (2) of the Constitu- 
tion provides that the nature of advice tendered by Ministers shall not be 
enquired into by the courts. 

Appointment of Prime Minister.— The Prime Minister is head of the 
Council of Ministers.* Art. 75 say* that “the Prime Minister shall be 
appointed by the President* and the other Ministers shall be appointed by (he 
President on the advice of the Prime Minister. The Council of Ministers shall 
be collectively responsible to the House of the Peopel.” But in appointing 
the Prime Minister the President can hardly exercise his discretion since we 
have adopted the English Cabinet System which work* on conventions. 
One of the well-established convention in England is that the leader of the 
majority party of the Lower House is appointed Prime Minister. Hence, the 
provisions relating to the Council of Ministers should be interpreted in the 
light of British experience, so the President'* choice to select Prime Minister 
is restricted to the leader of the party in majority in the Lok Sabha or, a 
person who is in a position to win the confidence of the majority in that 
House. Thus when a single political party has gained an absolute majority 
in the Lok Sabha and has an accepted leader the President's choice of selecting 
a Prime Minister is a mere formality. 

But in case of multiple party system as it prevails in India, if none is in 
a position to gain absolute majority and a coalition Government is to be 
formed, the President can exercise a little discretion and select the leader of 
any party who in bis opinion can form a stable ministry. But it has been 
suggested that even in such a situation the President’s action should 
be guided by certain conventions. Firstly, convention in England is that in case 
of the defeat of the Government in the House the President should invite the 
leader of the opposition in the House to explore the possibility of forming a sta- 
ble ministry. Secondly, he should invite the largest single party in the Lok Sabha 
to form a Government. Thirdly, if two or more party form a coalition before 
the elections and secure the majority in the Lok Sabha then also he has no 
option but to invite the leader of the coalition to form the Government. 

The last tw o precedents have been followed in the States. But they had 
not been practised uniformally in all the States by the Governors. In some 
States the Governors had called the leader of the largest single party to form 
the government and rejected the claim of the leader of the coalition, (for 

1. Article 75 (<)• 

2. Article 7$ (2). 

3. Article 75 (6). 

4. Article 74 (1). 

5. Article 75 (1) 



222 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


American form of Government is called the Presidential system of 
Government, what the Draft Constitution proposes is the Parlia- 
mentary System.*’ 

Under the Presidential System of America, the President is the Chief head 
of the Executive. The administration is vested in him. Under the Indian 
Constitution the President occupies the same position as the King under the 
English Constitution. He is head of the Stale but not the Executive. He re- 
presents the nation but does not rule the nation. His place in the administra- 
tion is that of a ceremonial device on a seal by which the nation’s decisions 
are made known. 1 2 

Thus his position is more comparable to the King or Queen in England 
than to the President of America. 

THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS 

Originally, Article 74 (1) provided that “there shall be a Council of 
Ministers with the Prime Minister as its head to aid and advice the President 
in the exercise of his functions”. After the 42nd Amendment, 1976, the lang- 
uage of Art. 74 (1) is as follows — ‘‘There shall be a Council of Ministers with 
the Prime Minister as its head to aid and advice the President who shall, in 
exercise of his functions, act in accordance with such advice." According to 
Article 75 (I), the Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and 
other Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the 
Prime Minister. 

The Council of Ministers consists of three categories of Ministers,— 
Cabinet Ministers, Stale Ministers and Deputy Ministers. The Cabin*! rank 
Ministers are the heads of their departments. All Cabinet Ministers are not 
members the Cabinet. They attend the meetings of the Cabinet when specially 
invited by the Prime Minister and when the matter concerning their depart- 
ment is discussed by the Cabinet. The Ministers of State are formally of 
Cabinet status and are paid the same salary as the Cabinet Ministers and 
they hold independent charge of their departments. 3 The Deputy Ministers 
are paid lessor salary than the Cabinet tank Ministers and have no separate 
charge of a Department. Their task is to assist the Ministers with whom they 
are attached to in their administrative duties. 

The Cabinet is the smaller body of the Council of Ministers. Though 
the Indian Constitution nowhere mentions the word Cabinet but it does 
incorporates the essentials of a Cabinet system of British Government. In 
Britain, the Cabinet is a child of chance and is essentially based upon conven- 
tions, i. e., unwritten rules. The Cabinet is thus an extra-constritutional 
growth based upon convention The Cabinet is the supreme policy- 
making body. The Council of Ministers never meet as a whole and it never 
discusses policy matters. All seniormost Ministers are the members of the 
Cabinet. 

The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House 
of the Penphu The Minister must he a memhei qC either Howsa paslva.- 
ment. A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member 
of either House of Parliament shall cease to be a Minister at the expiration of 
that period 9 In England there is no legal requirement that a Minister must 
be a member of Parliament. An outsider may be appointed a Minister but 

1. Constituent Assembly Debates, VoL VII, pp. 33-34. 

2. _ A minister (including State minister) is paid a salary of R». 2250 p. m. and a deputy 

minister is paid a salary of R$. 1750 p. m.— See The Salanes and Allowances of 
Ministers Act, 1952 (as amended by Act of 1970). 

3. Article 75 (5). 



222 


coNsrmmoNAL law of India 


iCbap. 


American form of Government is called the Presidential system of 
Government, what the Draft Constitution proposes is the Parlia- 
mentary System.” 

Under the Presidential System of America, (he President is the Chief head 
of the Executive. The administration is vested in him. Under the Indian 
Constitution the President occupies the same position as the King under the 
English Constitution. He is bead of the Stale but not the Executive. He re- 
presents the nation but docs not rule the nation. His place in the administra- 
tion is that of a ceremonial device on a seal by which the nation’s decisions 
are made known. 1 * 3 

Thus his position is more comparable to (he King or Queen in England 
than to the President of America. 

THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS 

Originally, Article 74 (I) provided that “there shall be a Council of 
Ministers with the Prime Minister as its head to aid and advice the President 
in the exercise of his functions”. After the 42nd Amendment, 1976, the lang- 
uage of Art. 74 (1) is as follows— “There shall be a Council of Ministers with 
the Prime Minister as its bead to aid and advice the President who shall, in 
exercise of bis functions, act in accordance with such advice.” According to 
Article 75 (1), the Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and 
other Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the 
Prime Minister. 

The Council of Ministers consists of three categories of Ministers.— 
Cabinet Ministers, State Ministers and Deputy Ministers. Tbe Cablrut rank 
Ministers arc the heads of their departments. All Cabiact Ministers arc not 
members the Cabinet. They attend the meetings of the Cabinet when specially 
invited by tbe Prime Minister and when the matter concerning their depart- 
ment is discussed by the Cabinet. Tbe Ministers of State are formally of 
Cabinet status and are paid the same salary as tbe Cabinet Ministers and 
they hold independent charge of their departments.* Tbe Deputy Ministers 
are paid lessor salary than the Cabinet rank Ministers and have no separate 
charge of a Department. Their task is to assist the Ministers with whom they 
are attached to in their administrative duties. 

The Cabinet is the smaller body of tbe Council of Ministers. Though 
the Indian Constitution nowhere mentions the word Cabinet but it does 
incorporates the essentials of a Cabinet system of British Government. In 
Britain, tbe Cabinet is a child of chance and is essentially based upon conven- 
tions, /. e., unwritten rules. The Cabinet is thus an extra-constritutional 
growth based upon convention. Tbe Cabinet is the supreme policy- 
making body. The Council of Ministers never meet as a whole and it never 
discusses policy matters. Ail seniormost Ministers are the members of the 
Cabinet. 

The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to tbe House 
of the People. The Minister must be a member of either House of Parlia- 
ment. A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member 
of either House of Parliament shall cease to be a Minister at the expiration of 
that period" In England there is no legal requirement that a Minister roust 
be a member of Parliament. An outsider may be appointed a Minister but 

I, Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. VII, pp. 31-3*. 

2., A mioisiet (including Slate minister) is paid a salary of Rj. 2250 p. m. and a deputy 
minister is paid a salary of Rs. 17JO p. m. — See The Salaries and Allowances of 
Ministers Act, 1952 (as amended by Act of 1970). 

3. Article 7$ (5). 



201 


TUB UNION EXBCUUVU, HfC. 


225 


Following a British precedent, the President invited the leader of the 
opposition Mr. Y.B. Chavan, who had moved the no-confidence motion, to form 
a Government. After four days of hectic activities, Mr. Charan Singh informed 
the President that he was not able to, form a Government. Uptil now, the 
president’s action was not subject to any ciiticsim. Thereafter the President 
adopted an unusual course and asked both Mr. Charan Singh the leader of 
the alliance and Mr. Dcsai the leader of the largest single party to submit the 
list of their supporters. The list submitted by Mr. Charan Singh showed that 
he had the support of 262 members while Mr. Desai’s list contained only 236 
members. From this it was clear that even Mr. Charan Singh did not have 
an absolute majority in the House (which should be 270). On the ground that 
Mr Charan Singh had the support of larger number of members than that 
of Mr. Desai, the President invited him to form an alternative Government. 
But since the President knew that Mr. Charan Singh had no absolute majority 
he asked him to seek a vote of confidence in the House within three weeks 
time. The Janata Party was still the largest single party in the House consist- 
ing of 205 members. The party headed by Mr. Charan Singh was a party of 
defectors and was not recognised as a parly in the Lok Sabha. It is submitted 
that the President was not justified in ignoring the claim of the leader of 
the largest single party and inviting the leader of the coalition formed after 
elections to form a government. In no sense, Mr. Charan Singh’s Ministry 
could be a “cohesive” and ‘stable’ Ministry as desired by the President. 
A leader of a party of 205 members was more likely to form a stable Govern- 
ment than the leader of a party of 77 members. 


Consequently. Mr. Charan Singh’s Ministry did not last long. Before, 
facing the Lok Sabha Mr. Charan Singh tendered bis resignation to the Pcrsident 
because one of his coalition partner (Congress (I) ) withdrew its support to 
his Government and advised the President to dissolve the Lok Sabba and 
order a mide-term poll. 

At the time of dissolution the position of different parlies in the 
Lok Sabba was as follows : 


Janata 

205 

Congress (0) 

83 

Janata (S) 

77 

Congress (I) 

64 

CP M 

22 

AIA DMK 

17 

Akali (J) 

8 

CPI 

7 


P W P 6 

UPF 4 

R S P 4 

Forward Block 3 

Muslim League 2 

N Conference 2 
Independent and others 31. 


Total Seat 554— Vacant 8 Speaker 1. 

ri u i> s hsX ‘SJM- isstzi ' £*&£ 

try. In both th , ^ xhr President did not follow the convention of calling 
r £ r, T, GO, f r , n hTo 0 ooS on " be had himself laid down earlier. The 

k,d:dm,wml to tn „,d.f a .lon,b,a,U« g ^ 

Const. 29 



224 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA [Chap. 


example, in Rajasthan in 1967 and Madras in 1951.) On the other hand, the 
Governors in some States had invited the leader of the coalition to form the 
Government and rejected the claim of the largest single party. Punjab in 1967, 
Bihar in 196$, West Bengal in 1970, Maharashtra in 1978 and July 1978.] 

In 1951, the Governor of Madras invited Mr. Rajagopalacbari of Cong- 
ress party the leader of the largest single party to form a government and 
rejected the claim of Mr. T. Prakasam who had formed a new party united 
having the support of 167 members in a House of 375 members. The Congress 
had a strength of 155 only. The Governor said, “The Head of the Slate is 
perfectly within his rights— in fact it is his duty— local) in these circums- 
tances, the leader of the largest group to form the Government. If all the 
other parties join together and defeat the Government, then and then only, 
can the Head of the State call the person whom these parties together may 
choose as their leader to talc charge of the Government. I do not think a 
Governor can lake inlo cogzanince any new parly that may be said to have 
been formed after the elections and before the legislature meets. He can only 
accept the nomenclature of parties as they were given before the elections. 
It was quite clear in my opinion that the Congress, having the largest following, 
should be invited to form a Government*'. 

In 1967 in Rajasthan the Governor Sampurnanand invited Mohanlal 
Sukhadia, though it had a strength of 91 in a House of 184, because it was the 
largest single party. He rejected the claim of the leader of the coalition formed 
after election. In 1967 in Panjab afler the fall of the United Front 
Government led by Gurnam Singh the Governor invited Lachman Singh 
Gill of the Janata Party (a break away group from U. F.) which had a 
strength of only 17 in the Assembly (out of 104) to form tbc Government. In 
Bibar, in 1968 after the fall of the United Front Ministry the Governor invited 
Mr. B. P. Mandat of Sosbit Dal. who had 38 members in a House of 318, to 
form a Ministry. 

In Maharashtra, after the 1978 elections the Janata Party was the largest 
single party in the Assembly having secured 133 seats in house of 288, but the 
Governor ignored the claim of the Janata Parly and invited the leader of the 
Congress— Congress (1) coalition to Torm the Government. Again in July 1978, 
in Maharashtra, after the fall of ihe Congress — Congtss (I) Ministry the 
Governor invited Mr. Shatad Pawar who defected from Congress and formed 
a coalition. 

In 1970 for the first time such a situation arose at the Centre after the 
fall of the Janata Government led by Mr. Morarji Desai. In 1977 several 
parties joined to form a united party namely the Janata Party to contest 
Parliamentary Elections. The Janata Party had a landslide victory and the 
Congress was totally routed. But the differences between the various political 
parties which constituted the Janata Government widened and finally the 
followers of Mr. Charap Singh left the party. The defectors formed a new 
party, Ihe Janata (S). A no-confideoce motion was moved in the Lok Sabha by 
Vte teadtt v-f oppvAWor., Mt Chavan against the Janata Government 
headed by Mr. Morarji Desai. While the no-confidcnce motion was being 
discussed in the Lok Sabha, the Prime Minister, Mr. Morarji Desai having 
lost his majority due to defection tendered his resignation to the President. 

The situation created by Mr. Desai's resignation has no constitutional 
precedent to guide the President as to the formation of a new Government. 
Legal experts have expressed divergent opinions as to the procedure the Presi- 
dent should adopt in selecting the leader of the successor Government. 



20] 


THE UNION EXECUTIVE BTC. 


227 


Dissolution of Lot Sabha. — Article 85 (b) of the Constitution provides 
that “The Presided may from lime to lime dissolve the House of the People” 
Thus the power to dissolive the Lok Sabba is vested in the President. Butin 
this respect also he does not have unfettered discretion and is always bound 
to act on the advice of the Council of Ministers. In England the King is 
bound to dissolve the House when advised by the Prime Minister. This is a 
well-settled convention in England. The position in India is the same. So 
long as the Prime Minister and his Cabinet cojoys the confidence of the 
Lok S^bha the President is bound to dissolve the House when advised by the 
Prime Minister. 


The question is-— Is the President bound to dissolve Lok Sabha on the 
advice of the Prime Minister or Council of Minister who does not enjoy the confix 
dedee of the majority in the House 7 

One view is that the President is bound to dissolve the Lok Sabha on the 
advice of the Prime Minister, whether he is in majority or reduced to minority. 
This view is based on a well-established convention in England, though there 
may be exceptions to this rule in exceptional circumstances. 1 2 In England it has 
been a uniform practice for more than a century that the sovereign should not 
refuse a dissolution when advised by the Prime Minister. Even a Prime Minister 
who is defeated in a no confidence motion can advise the King to dissolve the 
House of Commons. The recent precedent in Britain was the resignation of 
the former Prime Minister Mr. lames Callegham who was defeated in the House 
of Commons in a no-confidence motion and he advised the King to dissolve the 
House. The King dissolved the House on bis advice. 


This precedent can not be applied in the Indian situation, firstly, because 
of the multiplicity of political parties and secondly, in view of the countries 
economic situation which can not face frequent elections and thirdly, political 
immaturity of the electors. 


There are number of precedents in various States where the Governors 
had refused to dissolve the Legislative Assembly on the advice of the Chief 
Ministers who were defeated in the House in a vote of confidence or were 
reduced to a minority due to defections. In 1970, the Governor of Uttar Predesh 
refused to dissolve the Assembly on the advice of the Chief Minister, Mr. 
Charan Singh (the present Prime Minister) when he was reduced to a minority 
because of the defections in the B K D — Congress Coalition Ministry. 


The overwhelming juristic opinion is that the advice of the Prime Minister 
or Chief Minister for the dissolution of Parliament or State Assembly will not 
be binding on the President in the following four cases 

(1) when he loses his majority, or 

(2) when he is unable to prove his majority, or 


(3) when a vote of no-confidance is passed against the ministry, or 

(4) when he is not facing the Parliament (or Assembly), but the President 
(or Governor) has a proof that the ruling party does not have a majority. 

In the above mentioned circumstances the President must try to find out 
whether any alternative ministry can be possible. 1 He should make all 
oossible efforts to avoid a mid-term poll. Dr. Ambedkar had said in the 
Constituent Assembly, "The President of Indian Union will test the feelings 


1. See Jenning’s Cabinet Government, 3rd ed. pages 412, 42 8. 

2 , Die Hindustan Times December 2t, 1W 



226 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


Mr. Jagjivan Ram as the leader of the party of 205 members. This appears to be 
fantastic because h< made a great defector , Mr. Choran Singh as Prime 
Minister. 

'•It is submitted that the President’s action was not only improper and 
discriminatory but led to a situation in which be should never have placed 
the country. He set up a Government which never commanded the confidence 
of the House of the People at all, that Government was to remain in power for 
a period of over 4 months. The President of India has thus presented to the 
world the humiliating spectacle of a great democratic country being ruled by 
a Government which never commanded the confidence of the House of 
the People,” 1 

Thus it is clear that though in the above cricumstances the President can 
exercise his discretion in appointing the Prime Minister but it will certainly 
be better to laydown certain conventions in this matter so as to avoid the 
situation created by the unconstitutional action of the President. It is, 
therefore, suggested that in the matter of the appointment of the Prime 
Minister the President should follow the following principles : 

1. He should invite the leader of the opposition if the government is 
defeated in the House on a no confidence motion. 

2. He should call the leader of the coalition formed before the elections. 

3. He should invite the leader of the largest single party in the House. 

4. He should invite the leader of the coalition or alliance formed after 
the election. 

Thus the leader of the coalition or alliance formed after the elections 
should be given chance in the last, because such a coalition is not formed on 
auy common principles and policies but only with the object of getting into 
power. More so, when the coalition is formed with the help of the defectors 
from the ruling party and other parties join it simply to topple the Govern- 
ment. The President instead of following the precedent set by himself 
earlier and calling upon the leader of opposition Mr. Jagjivan Ram, decided 
to dissolve the Lok Sabha ordering a mid-term poll with Mr. Charao Singh 
as caretaker Prime Minister. It is submitted that by doing so the President 
acted against all known constitutional conventions and accorded honour and 
recognition to a person who has usurped the Prime Ministership by defec- 
tion. The Lok Sahba has never recognised him as the leader of the House. 

Advice of the caretaker Prime Minister. — The Constitution does not 
provide for a caretaker Government at the Centre but at the same time it does 
not also envisage a situation when the country will be without a popular 
Government. Articles 74 and 75 of the Constitution provide for a Council of 
Ministers at the Centre to aid and advise the President. The wording of Art. 74 
that “there shall be a Council of Mumtecs" makes it cleat that, there can. trot 
be at any time a vacuum. The inference is that even when Parliament is 
dissolved the administration has to be carried on by the President with 
the aid of a Council of Ministers or a caretaker Government. A caretaker 
Prime Minister is not barred from taking major decisions if the situation so 
demands. But the Caretaker Prime Minister can not take such policy decisions 
which would benefit his party in the coming elections. 

t. Serna i, Constilutional Law of India, Vol. HI. page 1826. 



20 ] 


THB UNION EXECUTIVE, BTC. 


229 


to tli* tot gabha The principle of colleclive responsibility means that the 
CounciVS Ministers is^s a body responsible to the Lot Sabha for the general 
council oi ftwmsi Government. The Council of Ministers work as a 
conduct of y^^Swr^abinct are the joint dicisions of all its 
rnemders! No matter whatever be their personal differences of opinion within 
the Cabinet but once a decision has been taken by it, it is the duty of 

th l C b ri ,^ ,« Minister to stand by it and support it both in the Legislature 

SSfcfii p'^^p" ° r 

ponsibility. 

•For all that passes in the Cabinet each member of it who does not resign 

Ltre'a^rn^r^raTmtrli- 

by his colleagues.”* 

Thus the only alternative before a Minister who is not prepared to sup- 
, .To defend the decision of the Cabinet is to resign. This is a great weapon 
?„ Ibe hands Sf the Prime Minister through which he maintains unit, and 
SiiSline in his colleagues (Cabinet). A Minister who does not agree with 
Prime Minister'or the Cabinet has the only alternative, that is, lo restgn from 
the Cabinet. 

According to this rule, lire Council of Ministers is collectively «*P°; s ' b '» 
to the Lok Sabha, hence as soon as a Ministry loses the confidence of h 
House or is defeated on any question of policy, it must resign. 

Minister's iudirldoal responsibility.-Along with the principle of collective 
, 1 ,. nrincinle of individual responsibility of each Minister to the 

responsibility the prtncipte of inatviauai r P > lbe tclI of lbe officers 

Sh!sd.'S.tmen ° He has'S answer question regarding the affaire of bis 
ofbis deparim p r ,: amcnt . He cannot throw the responsibility of his 

deoartroent cither oa his officials or another Minister. As IKa* and Phillips 
act or neglect of his department a Minister must answer’ If 
?; J?i r n H!?hS ..ken action with lbe approval of the Cabinet lbe principle of 
,h u,^v. re S po»Mty applies and the whole Cabinet should support and 
collective respo However, if the Minister has taken action svilbout the 
defend his actions. . c bioet may and may not suppott him. If the Cabinet 

n, VuS^ ,bc ^ w “i ”?• 

? b °= whole otbinei. Dot , be Cabinet cannot retain the Minister at and rhe 
same time contend that the responsibly is all his. 

rnuslllulionat duties oi the Prime Mtaister.-Atticle 78 provides that it 
ConstituuoD prime Minister (1) to communicate to the President 
•Sll of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the 

* i n the uSon and proposal for legislation. (2) to furnish such tnfoema- 
* ff .Hiine to administration of the allairs of the Union and proposals foe 
i f ,*? he President may cal! for, and (3) ir tha Ptesident so requites 
legislation as the Pecs ue irn^y lbt Con „ cJ of Mimstees any matter on 

wtSh”n decision" has' been ukea by a Minister but which ha. not been consi- 
dered by the Cabinet. ...... 

TO .tit. clear tbit the Prime Minister communicates the decisions and 
T* 1 "* Vre Vdvice to the President. The President in fact II tmund to 
Stop “he y d7cUions tak'n by the Cabinet. The decision is taken by the Cabinet 

, .an I) Sllul’un'a UrtP- 2I9-IO. 

| gam lawaya • P “">* b - “* 



228 CONSTITUTIONAL TAW OF INDIA {Chap, 

of the House whether the House agrees that there should be dissolution or 
whether the House agrees that the affairs should be carried on with some other 
leader without dissolutions.” 

In view of the abovementioned principles and the spirit of the Constitution, 
it is submitted the President was not bound to dissolve the Lok Sabha on the 
advice of Mr. Charan Singh. Mr. Cbaran Singh’s Government did pot at any 
time either have the mandate from the people or enjoy the confidence of the 
Lok Sabha. His appointment was conditional which was to be complete on 
having obtained the vote of confidence of the Lok Sabba. 

If he had been able to obtain a vote of confidence then only he would 
have become competent to tender any advice to the President for dissolution of 
the House. But before facing the Lok Sabha he tendered his resignation and 
after tendering the resignation of his Ministry be had no right to recommend 
for the dissolution of the House. The overwhelming legal opinion was that 
the President was not bound by the advice of Mr. Charan Singh. 

The fact that he carried on discussions for a number of days with 
political leaders after the resignation of Mr. Charan Singh’s Government makes 
it clear that the President did not think that he was bound by the advice of Mr. 
Charan Singh and yet be dissolved the House and allowed an unconstitutional 
Ministry to continue in office for 5 months. The President has nowhere said 
that he came to his decision to dissolve the House because of Mr. Cbaran 
Singh advice. Even if one concedes that the President was right in holding 
that no stable Government was possible in the prevailing circumstances, he 
had an obligation to prove without the shadow of doubt that bis assessment 
was indeed correct. The President would have stayed above controversy if he 
had given an opportunity to Jagjivan Ram to prove bis majority in the Lok 
Sabha. The Janata Paity was still the largest single patty consisting of 205 
members. No rational reason has been given as to why the President did not 
give a chance to Mr. Jagjivan Ram to form a Government. If he could call 
leaders of 70 M P's and 80 M P's to form a government why could he not 
ask the leader of 205 M Ps (Mr. Jagjivan Ram) to prove his majority on the 
floor of t> e Lok Sabha. 'Whether he proved his majority or not the controvercy 
would have lost nothing by testing his claim. 1 There can be no doubt that the 
Constitution gives the President do power to carry on the Government 
of the country by the aid of a Ministry which he may choose to appoint 
but which never commanded the confidence of the House of the People.® 

The other Ministers are to be appointed by the President on the advice of 
the Prime Minister. Thus the Prime Minister has the final word to choose the 
members of bis team (Cabinet). He must have such Cabinet colleagues who can 
work together and can secure the support of the Lok Sabha. 

This power of the Prime Minister is also essential for the proper function- 
ing of the principle of collective responsibility. 

Principle of collective responsibility. — The basic principle of Parliamen- 
tary form of Government is the principle of collective responsibility. In 
England, this principle works on well-established conventions. In India, this 
principle is ensured by making specific provisions in the Constitution. Article 
75 (3) provides that the Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible 

I. The Hindustan Times : August 20, 1979, page 6. 

J. Secrvai, Constitutional Law of India, Vol. HI. pa$e 18JI, 



20 ] 


IBB UMJON EXECUTIVE, HIC. 


231 


“He (the King) would be justified in refusing to assent to a policy which 
subverted the democratic basis of the Constitution by unnecessary or indefinite 
prolongation of the life of Parliament by gerrymandering of the Constituencies 
in the interest of one party, or by fundamental modifications of the electoral 
system to the same end.” 1 2 3 4 5 

No ministry has been dismissed in England on this ground. But in India 
there are examples. . Before the commencement of the Constitution the Khan 
Saheb Ministry was dismissed by the Governor of North-West Frontier Provinces 
on the above ground. 

There are two such instances after the Constitution of India came into 
force. In 1959 the Communist ministry in the State of Kerala was dismissed 
on the ground that it had lost the confidence of the people, although it enjoyed 
the confidence of the Legislature. 

In 1977 tbe Congress ministries in the nine States were dismissed on the 
ground that they had lost the confidence of tbe electorates. Again in 1980 
the Janata ministries in the nine States were dismissed on the grouad that they 
had lost the confidence of the people and also not co-operating with the Centre. 

Professor V. N. Shukla ,* has rightly observed that it is no violation of 
constitutional practice if the President dismisses a ministry when he is satisfied 
on reasonable grounds that it has lost the support of the people. The will of 
the people must in the end prevail and the President will be violating the 
Constitution if be allow* the discredited ministry to continue in office only 
because it has succeeded in managing to keep the members of tbe Legislature 
in its favour. 

But the real problem is how to know the will of tbe people. It is open to 
him from the views of the press and tbe result of bye-elections. But these 
methods are not free from difficulties. No doubt there is difficulty in obtaining 
the true information but if the President is clear and his decision is based on 
reasonable and proper grounds, there should be no difficulty in taking the 
action. 


THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL OF INDIA 


The Attorney-General of India is appointed by the President. The person 
to be appointed as Attorney-General must be qualified to be appointed as a 
Judge of the Supreme Court. 8 He holds office during the pleasure of the Presi- 
dent. He shall get such remuneration as the President may determine.* 

Functions of Attorney-General.— The Attorney-General is to give advice to 
tbe Government of India upon such legal matters as may, from time to time, be 
referred or assigned to him by the President. He perform such other duties 
of a legal character which may be assigned to him by the President from time 
to time. He has also to discharge the functions conferred on him by tbe Con- 
stitution or by any other law.* 


1. Jeonine’s Cabinet Government, p. 201 at p. 307. 

2. Dr. V. N. Shukla— Tbe ConstituUon of India, 1972 ed., p. 214. 

3. Article 76(1). 

4. Arlicte 7 6 (4). 

5. Article 76 (2). 



230 


CONSTITUTIONAL IW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


whose bead is the Prime Minister and it is binding on the President because 
it is the Prime Minister and his Cabinet which is resjjonsibk to the House 
of People. There is no provision in the Constitution which makes the President 
responsible to the Parliament. Indeed, it is anomalous to suggest that the 
Cabinet Ministers are answerable for the acts and policies of the Government 
in the making of which they only advice, while the final decisions are taken by 
the President. 

According to Article 78 (e).it shall be the duty of the Prime Minister, 
if the President so requires, to submit for consideration of the Council of 
Ministers any matter on which “a decision” has already been taken by a 
Minister but which has not been considered by the Cabinet. This is very 
necessary for the successful working of the principle of collective res- 
ponsibility. 

Dismissal of a Minister. — According to Article 75 (2) Ministers hold office 
during the pleasure of the President. But the President is bound to exercise 
his pleasure in accordance with the advice given by the Prime Minister. It is 
true that the President appoints the Prime Minister but other Ministers are 
appointed by him on the advice of the Prime Minister. It is the Prime Minister 
who selects the men of his team with whom he has to work. Moreover, for the 
effective realisation of the rule of the collective responsibly it is necessary 
that he should have unfettered discretion to select and to drop any Minister. 
If he thinks that the presence of any Minister is detrimental to the efficiency, 
integrity or policy of the Government he may drop him from the Cabinet or 
advise the President to dismiss him from the Cabinet. Dr. Ambedkar said, 
“No person shall be retained as member of the Cabinet, if the Prime Minister 
says that he shall be dismissed It is only when members of the Cabinet, if 
both in the matter of their appointment as well as in the matter of the dismissal, 
are placed under the Prime Minister that it should be possible to realize the 
idea of collective responsibly. 1 Shri M C. Chagla, Shri T. T. Krishnama- 
chari, Shri Ashok Mehta and Shri Morarji Desai had to resign as they had 
their differences with the Prime Minister. “The Prime Minister is really the 
keystone of the arch of the Cabinet and unless and UDtil we create that office 
and endow that officer with statutory authority to nominate and dismiss 
Ministers there can be no collective responsibility.’’* 

Dismissal of the Cabinet. — It is an established convention of Parliamentary 
type of Government that a ministry that has lost the confidence of the Lok 
Sabha must resign. If it insists on to remain in office the President, no doubt, 
can dismiss that ministry. 

What about a ministry which though enjoys the confidence of Lok Sabha 
but has lost the support of the people. Can the President dismiss such ministry ? 
There are two views on this point. According to Professor Dicey, the King 
can dismiss such a Ministry which though enjoys the confidence by the House 
of Commons but has lost the support of the people. On the other hand, 
Dr . Jwmwiga, 8 wi% VmA too. no tigYA To dismiss a ministry as long as 

it enjoys the confidence of the House of Commons. But he accepts one 
exception to tho above rule, viz. if existing Ministry postpones the general 
election. Dr. Jennings says : 

1. Constituent Assembly Debate, VoL VII, p. U59 . 

2. Constituent Assembly Debates. VoL VII, p. 1159; Dr. Ambedkar, the Chairman of 

Drafting Committee. 

3. Jenning’s Cabinet Government, p. 201. 



21 

'Pile Parliament 
(Arts. 79 to 122) 

Comoosition of Parliament. -Parliament of India consists of three organs, 
the President, the Council of State (the Rajya Sabha) and the House or the 
Peoole (the Lot Sabha). Though President is not a member of either House 
of Parliament yet like the British Crown, he is an integral part of the 
Parliament and pirforms certain functions relating to its proceedings The 
President of America is not the integral part of the Legislature. In India, the 
President summons the two Houses of Parliament, dissolves the House of People 
and gives assent to Bills. 

It is to be not'd that, though the Indian Constitution provides for the 
Parliamentary form of Government but unlike Biilain the Parliament is not 
supreme Snde the Indian Constilution. In India, the Constitution is supreme 
In England, laws passed by the Parliament can not be declared unconstitutional 
while the Indian Constitution expressly vestes this power in the Coutls. 

1— THE RAJYA SABHA 

The Raiva Sabha or the Council of Stales is the Upper House of the 
Union Parliament. The maximum membership of the Rajya Sabha is 
Ox°d at 250 of whom (a) 12 shall be nominated by the Presideat and 
the remainder, 1. e„ 238 shall be representatives of States and the Union 

Temtones ^v^ SuKJ cltclcd by lhc members 0 f lh e Legislative 

Assemblies in accordance with Ibc system of porponional representation by 
means of the single transferable vote. The representatives from the Union 
Territories are chosen in such a manner as Parliament may by law determine. 
?he Xeation of “all to each States or Union Territory and number of seals 
Inotttd to each in The Rajya Sabb. are specified in Ibe Fourth Schedule 

The 12 nominated persons are chosen by the President from amongst the 
persons having special knowledge or practical experience m Literature, Science, 
Art and -Social Service. 1 The nominated members do not participate in the 
election of the President of India. 

Th^nr«ent allocation of seats in the Council or States, among the States 
and Union Territories as given in the Fourth Schedule is as follows : 

Andhra Predesh 18. Assam 7. Bihar 22, Gujarat 11. Haryana 5. Kerala 

Ananra Iicut*** • • , 8 M , har ., hlr , iq Karnataka 1 r Omu 


lay a 1, 

T ° 13l The Raiya Sabha is permsuenl House. It is not subject to dissolution. 
Its tnembersare elected for a period of six years bm one-thud of its members 
retire after every two years. 

1. Article SO (II- 
S’ Jetted mtoibe Union of Indis m the 22ad Stale by the CoiwWatw* 

t36ih Aroendirenl) Act, 1975. 

Const. 30 



232 CONSmuiiONAL law OP iNUtA [Chap. 

According Vo ihe rales 1 made by vbc President under this Article vbe 
Attorney-General is required to appear on behalf of the Government of India 
in all eases in the Supreme Court in which the Government of India is concern* 
cd. He may also be required to appear in any High Court in any case in which 
the Government of India is concerned. He shill neither advise nor hold a brief 
against the Government of India in cases io which hj is called upon to advise 
the Government of India. Nor defend accused persons Tor criminal prosecu- 
tions without the permission of the Government of India. He is prohibited 
to take appointment as a director in any company. 

In the performance of his duties he has right of audience in ail Courts ia 
the territory of India.* He has right to speak and take part in proceedings of 
either House of Parliament without a right to vote . 1 He is entitled to all the 
privileges and immunities as a member of Parliament . 4 

The office of Attorney -General in England, and few other countries is a 
Political Office. He is a member of the Cabinet and comes and goes with the 
ministry. But the practice in India is different. The Attorney-General of India 
is not, as in England, a member of the Cabinet. There is a Minister of Law in 
the Cabinet to deal with legal affairs of Government level. 


*■ * ««* Cueut of lofa. E»traw> 

2. ArtKl* 76 0). 

5. AxiJiieM. 
a. ArtUe 105 U>. 



THE PARLIAMENT 


235 


The Constitution (36th Amendment) Act has admitted Sikkim into the 
Unionof India as the 22nd Stale of the Indue Union and has allotted one 
seat in the Lot Sabba to Sikkim representative. 


.. . . -.-t.iht.nfips For the purpose of cleclioa of the Lok Sabha 

. Se’isdivide?into territorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio 
each State i a tinn nf the constituency and the number of seats allotted 

««* State. 1 Each State is 
to, so fat as pr Sabba in such manner that ratio bet- 

““±r and “s populations, so far as practicable is the same for 
ween that number ana n t- P provides for uniformity of repre- 

^ ?V^fa2rS2tf*C?S betw«S the different States, and (bias bet- 
sentatioDintnoraiwU^U in the same State. The population for this 
vteen the diaetent o.ns ‘1 ^ of [he last ptect ding census. After the 

purpose will be a-scertaine allocation of seats in the Lok Sabha to the States, 
“dfiV'the dw'isiSn of each State into territorial constituencies shall be tead- 
in° mdln sue? m“n°; as Parliament may by law ptesettbe." 
i a rte si and 82 of the Con- 


i ustca in suco ui»uu» - . . „ 

j ♦ iq?a amended Arts SI (3) and 82 of the Con- 
Thc 42nd ^endment, 1976 amcndeO Arts^es l 7^ ^ explanation 

stitution and a ^'? c ^^^i a P; 0 n 'for the purpose of Article 81 shall be asecr- 
to Art. ; ofthe 1971 census and will be frozen till the year 2000. 

rained on the basts of I the idcd f urt her that such re-adjustment 

The new proviso to Art 82 says tnai pr order, specify and 

shall take cffcc , t / I 2 * 4 °™ s nt c ff C ct, any election to the House may be 

held on ttobaS? of ^territorial constituencies esisting before such 

** a< ^ . .i-Arr will be no re-adjusiment of the territorial consti- 

This means that *“” **“)’* “ til . the J vcar 2000. The readjustment of 
tuencieson the basis iofn up after the year 2000 and until this is done 
the constituencies my P Sabba Wll i be done on basis ofthe 1971 

the allocation of seats in ui _ ade m pursuance of the new population 

census. This Amendment difficult to understand how this 

policy of the G S c SSti ScteckAe growth of populaUon in the country. 

amendment would discourage people to produce more children and 

This would, it was hoped, disco S ^ cQ Whether re-adjustment 

thus Check the growth Of ^>puwuon, m ae _ -1|ocation of seats in the House 
S[Se SpKS U nSssa’ry after the year 2000 will be decided by the 
President. continue for five tears 


^Tenure of Lok Sabha.-Thc Lok Sabha shall continue for Jive years 

from the commencement of its first session ButwhUeap ro- 


\ fe S‘=eSu“nVf“S ! r^,hascen«d.«»pete>«-‘ 


1. Article SI (D 0»- 

2 . Article 8 U 2 )(*>- 

j. Article 82 . 

4. Article SJtl)- 



234 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Chap. 


Position in England.— The Upper House in England is known as House of 
Lords. Like our Rajya Sabha it is also a permanent House not subject to 
dissolution, but it differs from House of Lords in the sense that while House 
of Lords consists of mostly of heriditary lords created by the Crown, the Rajya 
Sabha is an elected body, though the election is indirect. Secondly, the member- 
ship of the House of Lords is for life but membership of Rajya Sabha is not 
for life but for six years only. 

Position in U. S. A. — The Upper House in U. S. A. is known as the 
Senate. Each State sends two Senators in Senate irrespective of its size, popu- 
lation wealth or importance. Its membership is 100. Terms of Senators, is 
six years but one-third of its members retire after every two years. Originally, 
the Senators were elected by the State Legislatures. But this method was 
ended by the Constitution 17th Amendment in 1913 which now provides for 
direct election of members of the Senate from people. Bui in Rajya Sabha the 
members are elected on population basis. Like Indian Rajya Sabha it is a 
continuing body and one-third of its members retire after every two years. Its 
tenure is for six years. 

In Australia, the Senate, is composed of ten members from each of the 
six States. The term of a Senator is six years, half of them are elected every 
three years. 


Importance of the Rajya Sabha.— The Rajya Sabha fulfils the following 
purposes : 


(1) It is considered useful because senior politicians and statesmen might 
get an easy access in it without undergoing the ordeal of general elections neces- 
sary lor the members of Lok Sabha so that exeperience and talent is not lost to 
the country and they may discuss questions of public interest. 


. (2) The Rajya Sabha acts as a revising House over the Lok Sabha which 
ocmg a popular House may be tempted to act rather hastily in keeping view of 
Pl* i'a C . u The ex ' sten . ce °f Rajya Sabha stops the drastic changes in 

i V I f co “ nti y made in the heat of momentary passion and affords 
period n ' ty JtS recons ‘deration b y delaying its adoption for a limited 


with the fedeza/principler* " * HO ““ ” be '' S,al “ are "P"*” 1 ' 11 te P“* 
The Vice-President shall be the ex officio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha. 

2 — -THE LOK SABHA 

the J! L °^ Sabha - 3 a P°P u ! ar Housc - Its members are directly elected by 
ma "T m ”“? ber ? f i,s membership is fixed at 545. a out 
more t^an ° rC h , a H 52 ^ are e,ectcd ** lhe votes States, (b) not 

more than 20 to represent the Union territories. 

on thc T basis C or r ^!i a f t r VeS eIe « e d directly by the people of the States 

PsnotlesshPl oil famch'se. Every citizen of India, male or female, who 
iesSnS u« 0 .mln«f S p° f ag f an ? is not disqualified on the grounds of non- 

;"o“1ScT,hf?rSabh” e .° r C °" Upt0 ‘ 


1. Article 83 (a), (b), 

2. The Constitution (3tu Amendment) Act. 1972 

3. Article 326. 



(6) dismissal from Government service for corruption or disloyalty to 
the State. 


me aiaie. 

Decision on questions of disqualifications of Members.-Atticle 103 pro- 
videsthat if any question arises to whether a member of either House of 
Parliament has became subject to any disqualification mentioned under Article 
cl, -it Up. referred to the President whose decision shall be 


Parliament has become subject to any aisquaHuwuwu ^‘“7 
102 the question shall be referred to the President whose decision shall be 
final However, the President is required to obtain the opinion of the Election 
“ n _ upf’ otvinf, anv decision on matter of qualifications and shall 


final However, the President is required 10 uuuuu v F uimi ,, 

Commission before giving any decision on matter of qualifications and shall 
act according to it. 1 


act according »»• 

The words ‘has become* in Art. 103 refer to disqualifications incurred 

bv the members subsequent to the election. Thu Article docs not deal with 
the disqualifications which arise at the time of the election. The question 
whether a person is disqualified at the time of election could only be decided by 
the Courts. 3 


Accordion to Article lot when a silting member becomes subject to a 
disquaUfication after bis election he will Ipso facto cent, to tea member, and 
Sat shall become vacant. No person can be a member of both Houses or 
O ,• 1 i .the same time If a person is elected member of both Houses 
of'patihmient h the Parliament may provide by law in which House he will 
SLf.Vhf. seat No person can be a member of both the Parliament end the 
IS. LenisSure. If a person is so circled then at the espiry of such lime a. 
f£ p3ent may by rules specify, that person's seat in rhe Parliament shall 
become vacant bnless he has ptiviously resigned bis seat in the Slate Leg, sla- 
lure.* ...... 


lure.* . 

Thr Renresentation of Peoples Act, 1951, provides that if a person U 
, , 7 “ u-.u Houses of Parliament, he must intimate within 10 days from the 
elected o both Houks 01 ban, , desires to „ [ve . default 

P ^„eh mimatfoaSK days, bis seat in the Raj, a Sabba at the espiry 
of such mtima 1 . vacant. If a person is already a member of Lok 

^bh^ifelectedto Rajya Sabba, his seat in the Lok Sabha shall become 
Sabha, is eleciea r yj member of Raiva Sabha and subsequently 


itrlfcied to Ra ya Sabba, bis seal in me me oauua 1 
S If a person is already a member or Rajya Sabha and subsequently 
Sd to t/k Sabba. bis seat in Raj, a Sabha shall become vacanL 


elected 10 i-o*. " 

» tn the Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950, 

According to the Promon and Housc of the Legislatures of State, 

if a person is elected to both ramauw ^ j 4 dayj> unlcss he has rcsigaed 

his seat m PmliamentlwcomM^ ffa perS0D is elected to the Legislatures of 
his seat in the : State Legislat e Legislature of such States becomes vacant 
two or more States, his «at rcsigned hU ^at in the Legislature of 

within 10 day* unless he - according to section 63 of the Representation of 

all but one of the States, oawo^^g ^ mor(J than one seat in either Housc 

SffiAHgtittE- be in »■> <*»* «a, in which be want, 

’° Taction of ~Vtb=”c£i» tb?“ 

resign bis seat by tmttnj! l vacant.* I? a member of either House of Parliament 

Hi, teat shall then become vammb It a from all meetiegs. of the 

without the permission of the Home, a declare hi, teat vacanL* A 

House for a period of si»y oa J* 


1. Article 103 0) p); Saks Venkata Subba Rao, AIR 1953 S. C. 210* 

2. Election Commission v. 

J. Article 101 (2). 

4 . Article 101 (3) (W» 

5 . Article 101 (4) 



236 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


the House of Commons, like the Lok Sabha is elected directly by people for 
five years on adult suffrage. It can be dissolved by the Crown even earlier. 
The House of Representatives in U. S. A., like out Lok Sabha is elected 
directly by the people. Its tenure is fixed for two years. The House of 
Representative differs from our Lok Sabha in one respect, that is not subject 
to dissolution before the expiry of its normal period of 4 years. The Lok- 
Sabha in India may be dissolved even before the expity of its normal period 
of 5 years. 

Qualification for membership of Parliament. — A person for being chosen 
as a member for Parliament must be — 

(a) a citizen of India, 

(b) not less than 30 years of age in the case of the Council of States 
and not less than 25 years of age in the case of House of the People, 

(c) possessing such other qualifications as may be prescribed by Parlia- 
ment, 

(d) taken on oath before some person authorised in that behalf by the 
Election Commission according to form set out for the purpose in Third 
Schedule. 

The Representation of Peoples Act, 1951, requires that a person's name 
should be registered as voter in any Parliamentary Constituency. 

Disqualifications.— A person is disqualified for befog chosen and for 
continuing as a member of Parliament if he suffers from following disquali- 
fications : 

(a) If he holds any office of profit under Central or the State Govern- 
ment, other than an office declared by Parliament by law not to disqualify 
its holder/ 

(b) If be is of unsound mind and a competent court has declared him to 

be so. 

(c) If he is an undischarged insolvent. 

(d) If be is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the citizen* 
ship of a foreign State, or under any acknowledgment of allegiance or 
adherence to a foreign State. 

(c) If he is so disqualified under any law made by Parliament. Parlia- 
ment has presented the necessary disqualifications in the Representation of 
Peoples Act, 1951. 

A Minister in the Central or the State Government is not considered as 
holding the office of profit/ 

The disqualifications under the Representation of peoples Act are 

(1) corrupt practice at an election, 

(2) conviction for an offence resulting in imprisonment for two or more 

years, / 

(3) failure to lodge an account for election expenses, 

(4) having an interest or share In the contract for supply of goods 
or execution of any work or performance of a service to the Govern- 
ment, 

f S) being a director or managing agent or holding an office of profit in 
a Corporation in which the Government has 25% share, 


1. Article 102 tl) 

2. Article 102(2). 



21 ] 


TUB PARLIAMENT 


239 


consideration the Speaker, , and when it is against the Deputy Speaker, the 
Deputy Speaker shall not preside at the sittings of the House, though he may 
be present. 1 The Speaker and Deputy Speaker will get such salaries and 
allowances as are fixed by Parliament by law and until a provision is so made 
as specified in the Second Schedule. 8 

The office of the Speaker is one of great responsibility. He upholds the 
dignity and privileges of the House. ' Once elected, be must rise above party 
interests. In England, it is a convention that the Speaker has to resign from 
his party. This is necessary to maintain impartiality on his part. The Consti- 
tution of India contains certain provisions for maintaining independence and 
impartiality of the Speaker. His salary is charged ca the Consolidated Fund 
of India and is not subject to the annual vote by Parliament. He cannot be 
removed from his office except by a resolution passed by a special majority. 


For Powers and Functions of Speaker — See under Chapter ‘State 
Legislature*. 


Sessions of Parliament 


The President shall from time to time summon each House of the 
Parliament to meet at such time and place as be thinks fit. But the right of 
the President to summon the House is subject to the condition that six months 
should not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appoint- 
ed for its sitting in the next session. 2 

In Smt. Indira Nehru Gandhi v. Raf Narain 3 the validity of the Con- 
stitution (39th Amendment) Act, 1975, was challenged on the ground that the 
constitution of the House which passed the Amendment was illegal. It was 
contended that the sessions of the Lok Sabba and Rajya Sabha were invalid. 
It was said that a number of members of Parliament were detained by Presiden- 
tial order after 26tb June, 1975 and before the summoning of a session of the 
Parliament. Unless the President convenes a session of the full Parliament 
by giving all members thereof an opportunity to attend the. session and exercise 
their right of speech and vote, the convening of the session would be illegal 
and unconstitutional and cannot be regarded as a session of the two Houses of 
Parliament. 

The Supreme Court rejected this argument of the respondent and held that 
the constitution of the House which passed the Constitution (39th Amendment) 
Act was not illegal on the ground (bat a number of members of Parliament of 
the two Houses were detained by the executive order. The contention that the 
sittings of the two Houses were not valid essentially relates to the validity of the 
proceedings of the two Houses of Parliament. These are the matters which are 
not justiciable and pertain to the internal domain of the two Houses (Art. 122). 
The Court cannot go into the question as to whether the sittings of the Houses 
of Parliament were not constitutionally valid because some members of those 
Houses were prevented from ' attending and participating in the discussion in 
those House.*. 

At the commencement of the first session after the general election to the 
Lok Sabha and at the commencement of the first session of every >ear, the 
President shall address both Houses of Parliament assembled together and shall 
inform the causes of its summons.* The Presidential address like the speech 



238 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


(Chap, 


declaration to this effect is necessary otherwise ihe seat will not became 
vacant. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 


The Constitution (33rd Amendment) Act, 1974, has amended Art. 101 and 
Art. V50, which provides that if a member of legislature resigns his scat the 
Speaker or the Chairman shall not accept his resignation, if, oo inquiry, he is 
satisfied that such resignation is not voluntary and genuine. The amendment 
•was an outcome of the Gujarat movement where members were compelled to 
resign their seats from the Legislative Assembly. ' 

Before taking seat in the House every member of a House of Parliament 
has to take an oath and affirmation before the President or some person 
appointed by him for this purpose according to the form specified in the Third 
Schedule.* Unless an elected member takes the oath, he does not become 
member of the House and so long he is not a member, he cannot sit in the 
House. If a person sits and votes as a member of either House of Parliament 
before he has taken oath under Article 99 or when be knows that he is not 
qualified to be a member of the House, or when he knows that he is disquali- 
fied to be a member of the House, or when he knows that be is prohibited 
from doing so (sitting or voting) by reason of any law made by Parliament, he 
shall be liable to penalty of 500 rupees for each day on which he sits or votes 
in the House. 8 9 , 

Members of either House of Parliament shall get such salaries and 
allowances as may from time to time be determined by Parliament' by 
law > 1 ' ’ ' ' v , ' J 

Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha.— The Lok Sabha 

cboses two of its members as Speaker and Deputy , Speaker. The Speaker is 
the Chief Officer of the Lok Sabha. He presides over its sitting and controls 
its working. When the office of Speaker is vacant the Deputy Speaker per- 
forms the duties of Speaker's office.* ‘ However, if the office of Deputy 
Speaker is also vacant, the duties oi,the Speaker shall be performed by such 
member of the House as the President may appoint for the purpose.® The 
Deputy Speaker also acts as the Speaker when the Speaker is absent from any 
sitting of the House. If, however, be is also absent, such person as may be 
determined by the rules of the House, and if no such person is present, such 
other person as may be determined by the House shall act as Speaker.’ 

The Speaker and Deputy Speaker remaia in office , so tong as they ate 
members of the House. As soon as they cease " to be members of the House 
they have to vacate their offices. However, the Speaker continues in his office, 
even if the Lok Sabha is ' dissolved, till newly elected Lok Sabha meets. The 
Speaker and Deputy Speaker may resign their offices or they may ' be removed 
from their offices by a resolution of the House of the People, passed by a 
majority of all the then members of the House.® Such a resolution cannot be 
moved unless at least 14 days’ notice has been given of the intention to move 
the resolution.® When the resolution for removal of the ■ Speaker is under 


1. Ansuraali v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1952 Cal. 637. 

2. Article 99. 'I tJ ■ 

3. Article 104. . , . • , 

4. Article 106. 

5. Article 91. 

6. Article 95(1). 

7. Article 95 (2). 

8. Article 94 (a) (b)(c). 

9. Ariicle 94, proviso. 



211 


, I HE PARLIAMENT . 


239 


consideration the Speaker, and when it is against the Deputy Speaker, the 
Deputy Speaker shall not preside at the sittings of the House, though he may 
be present. 1 2 The Speaker and Deputy Speaker will get such salaries and 
allowances as are fixed by Parliament by law and until a provision is so made 
as specified in the Second Schedule. 3 

The office of the Speaker is one of great responsibility. He upholds the 
dignity and privileges of the House, Once elected, he must rise above party 
interests. In England, it is a convention that the Speaker has to resign from 
his party. This is necessary to maintain impartiality on his part. The Consti- 
tution of India contains certain provisions for maintaining independence and 
impartiality of the Speaker. His salary is charged cn the Consolidated Fund 
of India and is not subject to the annual vote by Parliament. He cannot be 
removed from his office except by a resolution passed by a special majority. 


For Powers and Functions of Speaker— See under Chapter 'State 
Legislature*. 

Sessions of Parliament 

The President shall from time to time summon each House of the 
Parliament to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit. But the right of 
the President to summon the House is subject to the condition that six months 
should not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appoint- 
ed for its sitting in the next session. 3 

In Smt. Indira Nehru Gandhi y. Raj Narain, s the validity of the Con- 
stitution (39tb Amendment) Act, 1975, was challenged on the ground that the 
constitution of the House which passed the Amendment wa* illegal. It was 
contended that the sessions of the Lofc Sabba and Rajya Sabha were invalid. 
It was said that a number of members of Parliament were detained by Presiden- 
tial order after 26th June, 1975 and before the summoning of a session of the 
Parliament. Unless the President convenes a session of the full Patliameat 
by giving all members thereof an opportunity to attend the .session and exercise 
their right of speech and vote, the convening of the session would be illegal 
and unconstitutional and cannot be regarded as a session of the two Houses of 
Parliament. 

i The Supreme Court rejected this argument of the respondent and held that 
the constitution of the House which passed the Constitution (39th Amendment) 
Act was not illegal on the ground (hat a number of members of Parliament of 
the two Houses were detained by the executive order. The contention that the 
sittings of the two Houses were not valid essentially relates to the validity of the 
proceedings of the two Houses of Parliament. These arc the matters which arc 
not justiciable and pertain to the internal domain of the two Houses (Art. 122). 
The Court cannot go into the question as to whether the sittings of the Houses 
of Parliament were not constitutionally valid because some members of those 
Houses were prevented from ‘attending and participating in the discussion in 
those House.*. ( 

At the commencement of the first session after the general election to the 
Lok Sabha and at the commencement of the first session of every ) ear, the 
President shall address both Houses of Parliament assembled together and shall 
infoim the causes of its summons. 4 The Presidential address like the speech 


1. Article 96 (l). 

2, Article 97- 

%. Alticte85(l) 

4. Article 87 (1). 



240 CONttlTUHONAt, LAW OF INDIA ICbap. 


from the throne in England, is review of general policies of (he Government 
and indication of its future programmes to be taken up by the Government. 
It is not a private speech of the President. The speech is prepared by the 
Cabinet. The President is empowered to address either House or both Houses 
assembled together at any time and for that purpose require the attendance of 
members , 1 The President may send message to either House of Parliament 
whether with respect to a Bill pending in Parliament or otherwise. The House 
to which any message is sent shall consider any matter by the message to be 
taken into consideration. This practice may be justified in U. S. A., where the 
President sends message to Congress. President’s advisers are not members of 
the Coogress, therefore, the message constitutes a means of communication 
between the President and the Congress. This provision can hardly be justified 
in India where the President acts on the advice of the Cabinet. 

Prorogation.— Prorogation merely ends a session. Prorogation does not 
end the life of the House. The House meets again after prorogation. The 
power to prorogue the House is vested in the President. In England prorogation 
brings to an end all Bills or business thea pending before the House. But in 
India a pending Bill or business does not lapse on the prorogation of a session. 
It only means that the House ceases to do a business at a particular time, it 
takes up pending business for consideration when it meets after prorogation. 
An Adjournment terminates a sitting of the House. It is an act of the House 
and is exercised by the presiding officer at any time. An adjournment does not 
affect the incomplcled work before the House. The House may resume its 
business when it meets again after the adjournment. 

Dissolution.— A dissolution ends the very life of the House and general 
election then must be held to elect a new Lok Sabha. It is to be noted that 
it is the Lok Sabha which is subject to dissolution. The Rajya Sabha is a 
permanent body and not subject to dissolution. A dissolution ends (he very 
life of the House while a prorogation ends a session. 

The power to dissolve the Lok Sabha is vested in the President. But in 
this respect he also acts on the advice of the Prime Minister. In England the 
sovereign can dissolve the House when advised by the Prime Minister. This is 
a well-settled convention in England. The position in India is the same. So 
long as the Prime Minister and his Cabinet enjoys the confidence of the Lok 
Sabha the President is bound to dissolve the House when advised by the Prime 
Minister. 

Is the President bound to dissolve a House on the advice of the Prime Minister 
who does not enjoy the confidence of the majority in the House ? One view 
is that he must in all circumstances accept the advice of the Prime Minister. 
The other view is that the President is not bound to dissolve the House if he 
can find out an alternative stable ministry. The first vie v is based on a well- 
established convention in England. In England it has been a uniform practice 
for more than a century that the sovereign should not reruse a dissolution when 
advised by the Prime Minister. Even a Prime Minister who is defeated in a 
no-confidcnce motion can advise the King to dissolve the Parliament. In 
England, the King has always accepted the advice of such a Prime Minister. 
The recent precedent in Britain is the resignation of the former Prime Minister 
James Callaghan. He was defeated in a no-confidence motion. The King 
dissolved the Parliament on his advice. 

In this respect, the position in India is the same. The President is bound 


1. Article 86 (!)• 



TUB PABIMMENI 


241 


21] -i 

to dissolve the Lok Sabha oa the advice of the Prime Minister who enjoys the 
support of the majority of the members of the Lok Sabha. 

> However, where a ministry is defeated in the House in a no-confidence- 
motion or a ministry does not command the majority of the House the 
President is not bound by the advice of the Prime Minister. If he can find out 
an alternative ministry he may refuse to dissolve the House. 

In 1979, Prime Minister Mr. Morarji Desai who headed the Janata Govern- 
ment at the Centre, resigned from the Prime Ministership due to mass defection. 
A no-confidence motion was pending against the Government before the Lok' 
Sabha. Before voting could take place on the no-confidence motion, the Prime 
Minister, realising that he was reduced to a minority, tendered his resignation 
The Prime Minister, however, did not advice the President to dissolve the Lok 
Sabha. 

There is no precedent in the Centre. However, there are precedents ia 
the States where the advice tendered by the defeated Chief Minister has not 
been accepted by the Governors of the States. 

If not dissolved earlier the House stands dissolved at the expiry of its 
normal period of five years. But in emergency its life is extended for one year 
at a time, six months after the withdrawal of emergency the House is automati- 
cally dissolved leading to a fresh election. 

Effect of dissolution on the business pending in the House.— When the Lok 
Sabha is dissolved (1) a Bill pending in the Rajya Sabha but not passed by the 
Lok Sabha does not lapse, (2) a Bill pending in the Lok Sabha lapses, (3) a Bill 

S assed by the Lok Sabha but pending in Rajya Sabha lapses, unless it is saved 
y President's intention to call a joint sitting of Ihe two Houses. 

Functions of Parliament 

The most important function of the Parliament is the making of laws. 
The legislative procedure is initiated in the form of a Bill. 

Ordinary Bill 

An ordinary Bill, /. e. a Bill other than Money Bill and financial bills 
may originate in either House of the Parliament. The Bill must be passed 
by both the Houses of Parliament and then only it can be sent for President’s 
assent. It becomes a law when it is assented to by the President. Each House 
has laid down a procedure for the passage of a Bill. According to the 
procedure of a House a Bill to pass through three stages commonly known as 
Readings : First Reading, Second Reading and Third Reading. At first stage 
the Bill rs introduced in the House. At this stage no discussion takes place. 
The second is the consideration stage when the Bill is discussed clause by 
clause. At this stage amendments may b: moved. At the third reading stage a 
brief general discussion of the Bill takes place and the Bill is finally passed. 
When the Bill is passed by one House it is sent ( o the other House, where a 
similar procedure is repeated. If there is any disagreement between the Houses 
O'er any Bill, the Bill cannot be deemed at have been passed. 1 If the two 
Houses do not agree a deadlock is created. To rcsoUe such a deadlock the 
Constitution provides the method of joint sitting of the two Houses. 

Joint Session of House.— According to Article 10S when a Bill passed by 
one House and sent to other House— 

1 . KeraU an4 m MaJhya Pradesh. 

Const. 31 



242 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


{Chap. 


(1) is rejected by the House ; or 

(2) the House disagrees as the amendment to be made in the Bill ; or 

(3) the other House docs not pass the Bill and more than six months have 
passed the President may summon a joint session of both the Houses. 

The President, however, cannot summon a joint sitting if the Bill in ques- 
tion has lapsed by reason of a dissolution of the Lok Sabba. Jf the dissolution 
takes place after the President has notified his intention to summon a joint 
sitting, such sitting will be held notwithstanding the dissolution. The President 
may notify to the House by sending a message of his intention to summon 
them for a joint sitting for the purpose of deliberation and voting on the Bill in 
dispute. If the Houses were not in session the President may express fats' 
intention by a public notification. When the President has notified his intention 
of summoning the Houses to meet in a joint session neither shall proceed 
further with the Bill. 

If at the joint sitting of the two Houses the Bill is passed by a majority of 
the total number of members of both Houses present and voting it shall be 
deemed to have been passed by both the Houses. 1 2 3 

At a joint sitting of two Houses, no new amendment shall be proposed to 
the Bill except such which arc made necessary by the delay in the passage of 
the Bill If at all any amendment is necessary the decision of the presiding 
officer will be final.* 

At a joint silting of the two Houses the Speaker of the Lok Sabha or in 
his absence such person as may be determined by rules or procedure presides.* 

This provision does not apply to a Money Bill. The Lower House has 
exclusive power over Money Bill. The Rajya Sabba has no power to amend, 
modify or reject a Money Bill, passed by the Lok Sabha. The Money Bill can 
become law without the concurrence of the Rajya Sabha. therefore, no question 
arises for summoning the joint sitting of the two Houses for removing a 
deadlock. 


President’s assent.— No Bill can become law without the assent of the 
President even if it has been passed by both the Houses of Parliament Article 
111 says that when a Bill has been passed by both Houses of Parliament, it is 
sent to the President for his assent. The President may either— 

(a) give his assent to the Bill, or 

(b) he may withhold his assent, or 

(c) he may lelum a Bill if il is not a Money Bin, „, c „ ouse for 

^deration with or without a message suggesting such amendment, as he may 
recommend. When a Bill is so returned, the House, shell reconsider in the 
light or the Presidential message. However, if the Bin is again passed by the 
Houses with or without amendment and presented t 0 the President for i«enl 
the President shall not withhold his assent. ^resident tor assent, 

But if be withholds the Bill, in case of (b) this will amount to vetoing the 
Bill, which the Constitution permits. But it is to be noted tha\ this power to 


1. Article 108 (4) 

2. Article 108 (4) lb). 

3. Article 118 (4). 



2iJ TUfl 1’ARUAMfcNT 

veto the Bills is to be exercised on the advice of the Ministry. It is, indeed, 
unthinkable that the Government would wish to veto Bills for the passage of 
which it was responsible. 1 In England a similar power was vested in the Crown 
to give assent to a Bill, but it has now fallen into disuse and as a matter of 
convention he assents to a Bill on ministerial advice. 3 But if the President 
does not veto the Bill, but sends it to the Houses for reconsideration the power 
of veto is gone. 

Money Bill 

Article 110 (1) defines Money Bill as a Bill which contains only provision 
dealing with all or any of the following matters- 

(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any 

tax, 

(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any 
guarantee by the Government of India, 

(cl the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund, the 
payment or withdrawal of money from such Fund, 

(d) the appropriation of money out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India, 

(e) the declaring of any espenditute to be charged on the Consolidated 
Fund of India, 

m the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India or 
the public^account of India, or the custody or tssue of such money o, the 
audit of the accounts of the Union or of a State, 


to (0 


OI me awuuun 

( 8 ) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) 

But a Bill is not Money Bill which deals with- 
(a) the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or 
tb) the payment offers Toe licence or fees for service rendered, or 
(c) imposition, abolition, remission alleretion or regulation of any tax 
by any local authority or body for local purposes.* 

... whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not the decision 

of ihe* Sneake^of the House of the People shall be final. So when a 
jj* fife Ra i v a° Sab ha or presented to the President for assent, a certificate 
onV^Speaker^ball be endorsed 0 „ i, that it is a Money Btll > 

. nill can only be introduced in the Lok Sabba. It cannot be 

mttod^R^ 

HS.«e“noV= C cSSl£io» of the President is necessary unde, claused) of 
'• 

2. Wa Jo— Constitutional La». 16 th £■**• p - ,2J * 

3. Article HO (2). 

4. Article 1 10 (<)• 

3. Article 100 (l )• 



244 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA [Chap. 

Ibis Article for the moving of an amendment making piovision for the reduc- 
tion or abolition of any tax. 1 2 3 

After a Money Bill has been passed by the Lok Sabha, it is sent to the 
Raiya Sabha for its recommendations. The Rajya Sabha must return the Bill 
to the Lok Sabha within 14 days from the receipt of the Bill with its recom- 
mendations. The Lok Sabha may either accept or reject all or any of he 
recommendations of the Rajya Sabha. If the Lok Sabha accepts any of the 
recommendations of the Rajya Sabha the Money Bill shall be deemed to have 
been passed by both Houses with the amendments by the Rajya Sabha and 
accepted by the Lok Sabha. If a Money Bill passed by the Lok Sabha and sent 
to the Rajya Sabha for its recommendation is not returned to the Lok Sabha 
within 14 days, the Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at 
the expiration of the said (14 days) period in the form in which it was 
passed by the Lok Sabha. Thus the Rajya Sabha can at most detain a Money 
Bill for 14 days only.* If the Lok Sabha rejects all the recommendations of 
the Rajya Sabha, the Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both 
Houses in »he form in which it was passed by the Lok Sabha. Then it will 
be presented for President’s assent. 

The Lok Sabha may accept or reject the amendments suggested by 
the Rajya Sabha. It has Coal say with regard to the passing ol a Money 
Bill. 

financial Rills.— Financial Bills are of three kinds : 

(1) Money Bills— Article 110 (1). 

(2) Other Financial Bill— Article 117 (1). 

(3) Bills involving expenditure— Article 1 17 (3). 

Distinction between Money Bill, Financial Bill and Bill Invoking expendi- 
ture.— (1) A Money Bill is a bill which contains solely matters mentioned in 
Article 110(1). A Financial Bill, apart from dealing with one or more of 
the matters mentioned in Article 110 (1), deals with other matters also. Thus 
a Financial Bill is a Money Bill to which provisions of general legislation are 
also added apart from one or more matters of Article 110(1). All Money 
Bills are thus financial Bills but all financial Bills arc not Money Bills. 

(2) In two matters the Money Bill and the Financial Bill do not differ- 
(i) A Financial Bill, like the Money Bill, can only originate in the Lok 
Sabha, (ii) -like Money Bill, the Financial Bill also cannot be introduced 
without the recommendation of the Parliament.® 

(3) Financial Bill and other Bills involving expenditure differ from a 
Money Bill in so far as the former can be amended or rejected by the Rajya 
Sabba like any ordinary Bill. The Rajya Sabha cannot amend or reject 
Money Bill. And if there is a deadlock between the Houses it can be resolved 
by joint session of the Houses. Thus the Rajya Sabha has some control over 
Financial and other Bills involving expenditure. 

(4) As regards the procedure for its passing is concerned, a Financial 
Bill is as good as an ordinary bill except that a Financial Bill cannot be intro- 
duced without President’s recommendation and it can only be introduced in 

1 . Article 1 17 (1), 'Proviso'. 

2. Article 109. 

3. Article 117(1) 



21] IHS PARLIAMENT 245 

the Lok Sabha. Thus a Financial Bill is passed according to the ordinary 
procedure provided for passing of an ordinary Bill. 

As far as Presidential assent is concerned in' case of Money Bill, the 
President may either give his assent or refuse his assent. In case of a 
Financial Bill he may, however, in addition, refer it back to the House with 
a message for reconsideration. 

Annual Financial Statement ; (Badge 0 — Articles 112 to 116 . — According 
to Article It 2 the President shall in respect of every financial year cause to 
be laid before both the Houses of Parliament an annual financial statement, 
commonly known as the Budget. This statement gives out the estimated 
income and expenditure for that year. This estimated expend : ture is shown 
separately under two heads— (a) the sums charged upon the Consolidated 
Fund of India and (b) the sums required to meet other expenditure out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India. The expenditure or revenue account should also 
be distinguished from the other expenditures. 

The following expenditures are charged on the Consolidated Fund of 
India : 

(1) The salary and allowances of the President and other expenditure 
relating to his office. 

(2) Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of 
the Rajya Sabha and the Speaker and the Duputy Speaker of the Lok 
Sabha. 

(3) Debt charges for which the Government of India is liable. 

(4) Salaries, allowances and pensions payble to Judges of the Supreme 
Court, the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, Judges of the High 
Courts and Federal Courts. 

(5) Any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any 
court or tribunal. 

(6) Any other expenditure declared by this Constitution or by Parliament 
by law to be so charged. 

, Discussion and voting oa Budget. — According to Article 113 the expen- 
diture which is charged on the Consolidated Fund of India shall not be sub- 
mitted to the vote of Parliament. However, Houses are not prevented from 
discussing any of these items of expenditure. The estimates which relate to the 
expenditure must be submitted to the Lok Sabha in tbe form of demands for 
grants. The Lok Sabha has power to assent or refuse to assent to and demand, 
or to assent to any demand subject to the reduction of the amount specified 
therein. No demand for a grant is to be made except an the recommendation 
of the President. 

Appropriation Bills. - No money can be taken out from the Consolidated 
Fund of India unless the Appropriation Act, is passed. 1 Therefore, after the 
demands for grants under Art. 113 are passed by the Lok Sabha, a Bill 
known as Appropriation Act is introduced in the Lok Sabha. The Bill specifies 
all the grants made by the Lok Sabha, the expenditure charged on the Consoli- 
dated Fund of India as shown iu the previous statement before Parliament- 


1. Article 114(3). 



246 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


(Chap. 


But no amendment shall be proposed to the Appropriation Bill which will have 
the effect of varying the amount or altering the distination of any grant so made 
or of varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 

Supplementary Grants (Article 115). — If the amount authorised by the 
Appropriation Act to be expended for a particular service is found to be 
insufficient for the purposes of that year or when a need has arisen for any 
additional expenditure, a supplementary grant is made by Parliament. The 
procedure is the same for both the Appropriation Act and the Supplementary 
grant. 

Votes on Account— Votes on Credit and Exceptional Grant. — Before the 
Appropriation Act is passed no money is to be withdrawn from the Consoli- 
dated Fund of India. But the Government may need money to spend before it 
is passed. Accordingly under Article 116 (a) the Lok Sabha can grant a limit- 
ed sum from the Consolidated Fund of India to the Executive to spend till the 
Appropriation Act is passed by Parliament. 

Votes on Credit. — Under clause (b) the Lok Sabha has made a grant 
for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of India when on 
account of the magnitude or the indefinite character of the service, the demand 
can be stated with details ordinarily given in the Annual Financial Statement 


Exceptional Grant.— Under clause (3) the Lok Sabha has the power to 
make exceptional grant which forms no part of the current service of any 
financial year. 


However, it is necessary that Parliament shall make a law for withdrawal 
of money from the Consolidated Fund of India for the purpose the Lok Sabha 
has sanctioned the grants either by Annual Appropriation Act or Supplement- 
tary Grant, Excess Grant, Votes on Account, Votes on Credit or Exceptional' 
Grant. 

General Roles ©I Procedure.— Article 118 empowers each House of Parlia- 
ment to make rules for regulating its procedure and the conduct of its business. 
This rule-making power of the Houses is, however, subject to the provisions of 
this Constitution. 


Parliament may, for the purpose of the timely completion 
business, regulate by law the procedure and conduct of 
each Houses of Parliament in relation to any financial matter or to 
Bill. 1 


of financial 
business, in 
any Money 


The business of Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English. 
However, the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha or the Speaker or the Lok Sabha) 
as the case may be, may peimit any member who cannot adequately express 
himself in Hindi or in English to address the House in his mother tongue. 

Restrictions on discussion in Parliament.— Article 121 prohibits any 
discussion in Parliament with respect to the conduct of any judge of the 
Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties except when 
resolution is presented to the Parliament for the removal of a judge. The 
object of this Article is to ensure the independence of judiciary. 

Courts not to inqnire into proceedings of Parliament.— Article 122 lays 
down that the validity of any proceedings in Parliament cannot be called in 


1. Article 119. 



211 


TUB FAWJAUEHT 


247 


srt - » -* ss « ttjg- 

cedure on the pnduct of business “J® f . th^ exercis?' b“hiS of 

S'S'gS SSS quesdon^as to the valfdrt, of the proceeding, in the Houses 
of Parliament. 8 

The Comptroller ‘^iofidhylh" 
shall be a Comptroller andAu before entering upon his office before 

President of India. He has ^ cr S“ a ^inSS b y the Pr«idcnt for that purpose, 
the President or some consolidated Fund of India and cannot be varied 
Hi* salary is charged on the Consol.dat^ ™ ^ hU Qffice> hc shall not be 
to his disadvantage. After he ^ or Sule Government. He may be 

eligible to hold any office un nef aod 0 n similar grounds (proved 

Supreme Court is removed from 

te “umles and SfSjffiS 

such duties and exercise rnth po d | aw made by Parliament. 

and or States as may be prescribed hyot uno y exercise powers 

Until such a *" » g»f 7 -G^SrL of" India immediately before tbo 

ns were eserc, sable by ae -And tor o » ^ ^ diuieJ _ aQ Accoun- 

commencement of the Conswol d Sorsed by Centntl or Slate Gosetn- 

“J £ of the Union and of the Stales m the manner 

prescribed by the „ rthe Union and of the Slates sbaU 

Art. 150 ptb*|d« «>“ ““ „„ the advice of ihc Comptroller 

be kept in such form prescribe. Thus it empowers the President to 

and Auditor-General tfa P accounts of lhe Union and of the State shall 

prescribe tne iorm 

be maintained. . . . 

. c _r ,he Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to 
The reports of the Go® p bnjiucd 10 thc President who shall cause 

the aecounis of iheUnroosball U s Hc shjll submit , ep<jm of accounts of 

Slo the Governor oflbc Sure who mus. lay it before .be Leg, nature of the 
State. 7 


, HemchanJta Sen Copts «. the S«sUr, AIR IMS CsL 3JS. 

2 . ChhoieylaW Srste^O P..AIR.9S. A ^ ^ .no M.S.M. 

: sSSb. AIR IM SC l.SS. 

4 Article 14S- 

5. ArtKla 1W- 

6. Article MO* 

7 Article HI* 



Tile Union Judiciary-The Supreme 
Court 

{Arts. 124 -to 147) 

"The Judiciary was to be an arm of the social revolution upholding the 
equality that Indians had longed for.” 

Supreme Court — The Guardian of the Constitution — The essence of a 
Federal Constitution is the division of powers between the Central and State 
Governments. This division is made by the written Constitution which is the 
Supreme Law of the Land. Since language of the Constitution is not free from 
ambiguities and its meaning is likely to be interpreted differently by different 
authorities at different times. It is, therefore, natural that in any federation 
disputes might arise between the Central and its constituent units regarding 
their respective powers. Therefore, in order to maintain the supremacy of the 
Constitution, there must be an independent and impartial authority to decide 
disputes between the Centre and the States, or the States inter se. This func- 
tion can only be entrusted to a judicial body. The Supreme Court under our 
Constitution is such an obiter. It is the final interpreter and the guardian of 
the Constitution. 

The Supreme Court under the Indian Constitution, in addition to the 
above function of maintaining the supremacy of the Constitution, is also the 
guardian of the Fundamental Rights of the people. Really, the Supreme 
Court has been called upon to safeguard civil and minority rights and play the 
role of “guardian of the social revolution”. 1 2 It is the great tribunal which has 
to draw the iliac between individual liberty and social control. 3 4 It is also the 
highest and final interpreter of the general law of the country. It is the highest 
Court of Appeal in civil and criminal matters. 

Composition of the Conrl.-The Supreme Court of India consists of a Chiee 
Justice and, until Parliament may by law prescribe a larger number, not morf 
than seven other Judges. Under this power, the Parliament has now increased 
the number of Judges to IS including the Chief Justice.* Thus the Supreme 
Court, at present consists of the Chief Justice of India and 17 other Judges. 
The Constitution does not provide for the minimum number of Judges. 

Appointment of the Judges.— Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed 
by the President. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court is appointed by the 
President with the consultation of such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and 
the High Courts as he deems necessary for the purpose. But in appointing 
other Judges, the President shall always coosult the Chief Justice of India. He 
may consult such other Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts as he 
may deem necessary.* ft should, however, he noted that the power of the 
President to appoint Judges is purely formal because in this matter he acts on 
the advice of the Council of Ministers. But there was an apprehension that 
such a body may bring politics in the appointment of Judges. The Indian 

1. Austin, G.— The Indian Constitution Cornerstone of Nation, p. 169. 

2. Sri Alladi Krishnaswamy Alyer, Member of Drafting Committee. 

3. The Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Act, 48 of 1977. 

4. Article 124 (2). 



22 ) 


1I1£ UMOH JUDICIARY 


249 


Constitution, therefore, does not leave the appointment of Judges on the discre- 
tion of the Executive. The Executive under this Article is required to consult 
persons who are ex hypothesis well qualified to give proper advice in matters of 
appointment of judges. 1 

Under Article 124 (2) the President, in appointing other judges of the 
Supreme Court is bound to consult ^he Chief Justice of India. But io appoint- 
ing the Chief Justice of India he is not bound to consult anyone. The word 
‘may* used in Article 124 'makes it clear that it is not mandatory on him to 
consult anyone. 

The practice up to 1973 was to appoint the senior most Judge of the 
Supreme Court as the Chief Justice of India. This practice had virtually been 
transformed into a convention which had been followed by the Executive with- 
out any exception. 

In 1956, however, the Law Commission headed by the then Attorney- 
General, M. C. Scialvad criticised this practice and recommended that in 
appealing the Chief Justice of India the experience of a person as a Judge, his 
administrative competence and merit should be judged and seniority should 
not only be the main consideration. The Law Commission's 1 4th Report* 
says: 

“For the performance of the duties of Chief Justice of India, there is 
needed, not only a judge of ability and experience, but also a competent 
administrator, capable of handling complex matters that may arise from time 
to time, a shrewd judge of men and personalities and above all, a person of 
sturdy independence and towering personality who would, on the occasion 
arising, bs a watchdog of the independence of the Judiciary. It is well 
accepted that the qualifications needed for a successful Chief Justice are very 
different from the qualifications which go to make an erudite and able judge. 
The considerations which must, therefore, prevail in making the selection to 
this office must be basically different from those that would govern the 
appointment of other judges of the Supreme Court.” 

“In our view, therefore, the filling of a vacancy in the office of the Chief 
Justice of India should be approached with paramount regard to the 
considerations mentioned above. It may be that the seniormost puisne judge 
fulfils these requirements. If so, there could be no objection to his being 
appointed to fill (he office. But very often that will not be so. It is therefore, 
necessary to set a healthy convention that appointment to the office of the Chief 
Justice rests on special considerations and does not as a matter of course go 
to the seniormost puisne judge. If such a convention were established it could 
be no reflection on the seniormost judge, if he is not appointed to the office 
of the Chief Justice. We are in another place suggesting that such a convention 
should be established even in the case of appointment of Chief Justice of 
High Court. Once such a convention is established it will be the duty of 
those responsible for (he appointment Co choose a suitable pecsoa foe that 
high office, if necessary, from among persons outside the Court. Chief Justice 
of High Courts, puisne judges of High Courts of outstanding merit and 
distinguished senior members of the Bar should provide an ample recruiting 
ground.” 

The reports of the Law Commission were published as far back as in 1956. 


J. C. A. D. Vol. 8. p. 28S. 

2. Law Commission of India, I4th Report, pp. 39, 40. 

Const. 31 



255 


The Union Judiciary— The Supreme 
Court 

(Arts. 124 to 14V) 

“The Judiciary was to be an arm of tbc social revolution upholding the 
equality that Indians had longed for.** 

Supreme Court — The Gusrdian of the Constitution — The essence of a 
Federal Constitution is the division of powers between the Central and State 
Governments. This division is made by the written Constitution which is the 
Supreme Law of the Land. Since language of the Constitution is not free from 
ambiguities and its meaning is likely to be interpreted differently by different 
authorities at different times. It is, therefore, natural that in any federation 
disputes might arise between the Central and its constituent units regarding 
their respective powers. Therefore, in order to maintain the supremacy of the 
Constitution, there must be an independent and impartial authority to decide 
disputes between the Centre and the States, or the Stales inter se. This func- 
tion can only be entrusted to a judicial body. The Supreme Court under our 
Constitution is such an obiter* It is the Goal interpreter and the guardian of 
the Constitution, 

The Supreme Court under the Indian Constitution, in addition to the 
above function of maintaining the supremacy of the Constitution, is also the 
guardian of the Fundamental Rights of the people. Really, the Supreme 
Court has been called upon to safeguard civil and minority rights and play the 
role of “guardian of the social revolution’’. 1 2 3 It is the great tribunal which has 
to draw the dine between individual liberty and social control.* It is also the 
highest and dual interpreter of the general law of the country. It is the highest 
Court of Appeal in civil and criminal matters. 

Composition of the_Court.--The Supreme Court of India consists of a Chicc 
Justice and, until Parliament may by law prescribe a larcer number, not morf 
than seven other Judges. Under this power, the Parliament has now increased 
the number of Judges to 18 including the Chief Justice.* Thus the Supreme 
Court, at present consists of the Chief Justice of India and 17 other Judges. 
The Constitution does not provide for the minimum number of Judges. 

Appointment of the Judges.— Judges of the Supreme Court arc appointed 
by the President. The Chier Justice of the Supreme Court is appointed by the 
President with the consultation of such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and 
the High Courts as he deems necessary for the purpose. But in appointing 
other Judges, the President shall always consult the Chief Jnsticc of India. Ho 
may consult such other Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts as he 
may deem necessary. 4 It should, however, be noted that the power of the 
President to appoint Judges is purely formal because in this matter he acts on 
the advice of the Council of Ministers. But there was an apprehension that 
such a body may bring politics in the appointment of Judges. The Indian 

1. Austin, O.— The Indian Constitution Cornerstone of Nation, p. 169. 

2. Sri Aliadi Krisbnaswamy Aiyer, Member of Drafting Committee. 

3. The Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Act, 48 of 1177. 

4. Article 124 (2). 



me UNION JUDICIARY 


251 


t IDE UMiurt 

..For .he ,P«ro r »? 

shrewd judge of men. f^JSSSto “ho »5d 7 d Ite occasion arising be a 
dependence and towering P ers °^'‘ ?j iciarv It may be that the senior- 

S!M «?B£saf £—•■' ' f • tb "‘ ““ ld b ‘ ” ° bj “ ,,on 

to bis being appointed to fill the otbee. . 

10 nis uciu b yi tipnlthv convention that appointment 

•‘It is therefore, neassary to set cons jd er ations and docs not 

to the office of the Chief J us '‘“* ', e ^ os , p 5i sne judge If such a convention 
as a matter of course go to the seiuo'm “ P J sjtiormost puisne judge if 
were established it would be no reflection on “ . 
he be not appointed to the office of He Chiel Jusucc. 

nc uc u i yy m men dcd for appointing the Chief 

Thus when the Law Cotnmissto not „„ seniority it did not mean 

Justice of the Supreme Court or I mer Tbe ihree senior and eminent 

that merit from the view point of the t e ^ ^ posstss lhe 
i^mmenTedT^Uw CoSSi. hut because they decided eases aga, ns, 

also recommended for es.ahhshing a health, con- 

ven, io^e any such without estab.ishln.a^w 

In the present case, the a PP° l "r , wanted to carry out the recoromenda- 
convention s “If the »• advance and taken. the Bar 

lions it could have declared the " c J() the letter and lhe spirit of the 
and the Public ”“ed and the Judges were passed over merely 

becTuse'their decision 'wen, against the Government. * 

because tnei F« c utive is entitled lo lake into considers- 

Thirdly, it is argued that the Ex . . 0 f judges. The Government 

.ion the meit’al outlook or the soeal ,b.t a Judge should 

in a democracy is ™,,h?ofibe ruling parly. This has virtually been 

subscribe to the social philo Pj. the supersession policy Mr Kumara- 
claimed by the Government ? o com e to the conclusion that the philosophy 
man glam said “we ^ecDtitledto judge is ‘backward looking and 

° f dSide U tSt ,! 'we^will take “he forward-looking judge and not thc backward- 
looking judge. lhe social philosophy of judges play an 

It is true that in deciding . . Q what ^, n d 0 f social philosophy a 
important part. But q p^dently thc philosophy of the Constitution. The 
Judee is to subscribe to i ?— Evidently. p • , philosophy. Thus it is clear 

Preamble in the » «G soefal philosophy of the 

that the Supreme Court . philosophy of the ruling party. The Constitution 
Constitution and not to *V® It »* meant for generations. A party which 
is the supreme law of the lana ef on , y for fivc years. . Then, again 

, forms the Government remain « P J in J ower . a party in powerroay 
Constitution 8 In He eire.ms.nnersis 

T1 , „I Judge. The Price ofBecuii.e leierterence 

1. K- Subba *^? b lJby S Bar Council, U. P. p. «- 

2 G ‘ ,V ’ n '”“‘ 



250 


CONSinUllONAL LAW OP INDIA 


(Chap. 


Since then 17 years hah passed bur no attempt had been made on the part or 
?he Government to implement them. Rather, the Government follmed the 
principle of appointing the Chief Justice of India on the basis of seniority as 
matter of rule. 


Controversy over the appointment of the Chief Justice of India. — On 
Aoril 25 1973, however, this 22 years old practice was suddenly brokea by the 
Government within few hours of the delivery of the judgment in the Funda- 
mental Rights case. Mr.A.N. Ray was appointed as Chief Justice of India 
superseding three of his senior colleagues. Justices Shelal, Hegde and Grover. 
And eight hours after the swearing in ceremony of Mr. A. N. Ray, as the Chief 
Justice of India, the three judges resigned from the Supreme Court. The action 
of the Government aroused a great controversy. The Supreme Court Bar 
Association by a unanimous resolution strongly condemned the action of the 
Government in superseding the three eminent Judges of the Supreme Court. 
The resolution characterised the appointment as purely political having ‘no 
relation whatever to merits.’ According to the resolution, the Government’s 
action was a blatant and outrageous attempt and undermining the independence 
and impartiality of the judiciary and lowering the prestige and dignity of the 
Supreme Court . The action clearly showed that the Government could not 
tolerate and countenance an independent judiciary. On the other hand, the 
Government justified its action on the following grounds: 


The first reason given by the Government was that under the Constitu- 
tion the President has absolute discretion to appoint any one whom he finds 
suitable for the post of the Chief Justice of India. We all agree that there is 
such a power vested in the President. But during the period of over 22 years 
the President had never exercised bis discretion. He rather chose to follow the 
practise of appointing the seniorraost judge as the Chief Justice of India, Tbis 
practise had virtually been converted into a convention. According to Mr. 
Kumarmangalam, “one of the staunch supporters of the supersession of the 
Judges, a convention which was considered wrong at the time by the Law 
Commission does not become right only on the ground that it has been obser- 
ved for a long time ”* We are entitled to ask him why this wrong convention 
was allowed to be observed for such a long time 7 It is strange that the Presi- 
dent realised his mistake only on April 25, 1973, and that too after the judgment 
of the Supreme Court in the great Constitutional case. This certainly created 
doubts in. the mind of the people about the propriety of its action which the 
Government had failed to dispel. 


Secondly, it was argued that the Government followed the recommenda- 
tions of the Law Commissions in appointing the Chief Justice and superseding 
the three senior judges. Here also the Government’s case fails. Firstly, the 
Reports of the Law Commission were published in 1956 but it was not imple- 
mented for about 17 years. Thus in the words of K Subba Rao, the former 
Chief Justice of India, the report was impliedly rejected by long inaction but 
was revived suddenly on April, 25, 1973, to sustain on indefensible action.* 
Secondly, the report of the Law Commission itself destroys the Government’s 
case. Had the Government followed the recommendations of the Commission 
thethtee senior judges would not have been superseded. The report of the 
Commission itself lays down the qualifications of the Chief Justice of the 
Supreme Court. It says : 


|. See Kumaramanglam’s Judicial Appointments, p. 14. 

2. K. Subba Rao— The Supersession of Judges. Tbe Price of Executive Interference, 
Souvenir, published by Bar Council of U. P., p , 43. 



22 ] 


TUB UNION JUMCIARY 


253 


may by law provide. 1 2 A judge may, however, resign his office by writing to 
the President. 1 Under Cl. (b) it is not clear whcllier a resignation sent to the 
President is final or whether it becomes ciTeciive only when accepted by the 
President or can it be withdrawn before it is accepted by the President ? This 
question was raised before the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. 
Gopal Chandra Mishra. 3 * 5 Although the case is based on Art. 217 relating 
to the resignation of a High Court Judge, but it applies to Art. 124 (< 5 ) also 
because Art. 124 (6) is in similar terms. The Court has held that in the absence 
of a legal, contractual cr constitutional bar a •'prospective’' resignation can be 
wirbdrawn before it becomes effective and it becomes effective when j| opcraics 
to terminate the employment or the office tenure of the resignor. 'Resignation' 
takes place when a judge of his own volition chooses to sever his connections 
with his office. If in terms of his writing he resigns iv present! the resigna- 
tion terminates his office-tenure forthwith, and cannot therefore be withdrawn 
or revoked thereafter. But, if by such writing he chooses to resign from a 
future date, the act of resigning is not complete because it does not terminate 
bis tenure before such dale and the Jaidge can at any time before the arrival 
of tbal prospective date on which it was intended to be effective, withdraw it, 
because the Constitution does not bar such withdrawal. 

A judge may be removed from his office by an order of the President 
only on grounds of proved misbehaviour or incapacity. The order of the Presi- 
dent can only be passed after it has been addressed to both Houses of Parlia- 
ment in the same session The address must be supported by a majority 
of total membership of that House and also by a majority of not less than 
two-thirds of the members of that House p.esent and voting.* The procedure 
for the presentation of an address for investigation and proof of the misbehavi- 
our or incapacity of a judge will be determined by Parliament by law. 6 The 
security of ihe tenure of the Supreme Court Judges has been ensured by this 
provision of the Constitution. In America, the Judges of Supreme Court hold 
office for life. They can, however, be removed by impeachment in cases of 
treason, bribery or other high crimes and misdemeanours. 

The Constitution prohibits a person who has held office as a judge of the 
Supreme Court from practising or acting as a judge in any court before any 
authority within the territory of India. But uader Article 128, the Chief Justice 
may appoint the retired judges to act as ad hoc judges in the Supreme Court. 

Acting Chief Justice. — When the office as the Chief Justice io India is 
vacant or when the Chief Justice is, by reason of absence or otherwise, unable 
to perform the duties of his office, the duties of his office shall be performed 
by such one of the other judges cf the Supreme Court as the President may 
appoint. 8 

Ad hoc Judge.— If at any time the quorum of the Judges to hold and 
continue any session of the Court, the Chief Justice of India with the previous 
sanction of the President requests a judge of the H igh Court to act as ad hoc 
Judge. The ad hoc judge should be qualified to be appointed as a judge of the 
Supreme Court. 7 


1. Article 124 (2-A). 

2. Article t24(ZI(a). 

3. A. I. R. 1978 S. C. 694 

4 Article 1 24 (1 ) (b) and clause (4). 

5. Article 124(5). 

6. Article >26. 

7. Article 127. 



252 


cuNsmunoNM. law or india 


[Chap. 


the duly of a Judge *o uphold Hie philosophy of the Constitution or the philo- 
sophy of the ruling pariy 7 Surely a judge is to upheld the philosophy or the 
Constitution to which he owes his allegiance. 


The iadepnedcncc and impartiality of the judiciary is one of the hallmarks 
of the democratic set up of Government. To give to the Executive an unfettered 
discretion to decide the philosophy of the judges is to make the judiciary sub- 
servient to the Executive. Every judge who desires to be elevated to the highest 
post of the Chief Justice of India will try his best to become a 'forward-looking 
judge’ in the eye of the Government. 

It is, therefore, essential to evolve and establish a healthy convention, so 
„s to delude the arbitrary ioteift rente of Executive in the matter of appoint- 
ment of the Chief Justices of the Supreme Court aod the High Courts. It is, 
therefore, suggested that a Commiitec, consisting of the Attorney-General, Law 
Minister, the President of the Bar Council of India, the President of the Sup- 
reme Court Bar Association and the Retiring Chief Justice of India, may be con- 
stituted and authorised to suggest a panel of Dames for the appointment of the 
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and the various High Courts. 


Position after the assumption of Janata Government at the Centre.— Aficr 
the general election in March, 1977, the Janata Government assumed oIGce at 
the Centre. The members of the Janata party had criticised the policy of the 
supersession of the Judges of the Supieme Court. Consequently, they have 
again revived the old practice of appointing the Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court on the basis of seniority. It is submitted that the rule of seniority, 
though a mechanical rule, is beyond controversy and will definitely ensure 
independence of judiciary. 


Qualification of Judges.— A person to be qualified for appointment as a 
Judge of the Supreme Court must be a citizen of India; and (1) has been a 
Judge of a High Court at least for five years, (2) has been for at least ten years 
an advocate of a High Court, (3) is, in the opinion of the President, a distin- 
guished jurists.* Thus, a non-practising or an academic lawyer may also be 
appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Coui t if he is, in the opinion of the 
President, a distinguished jurist. 


There are precedents in America where non-practising lawyers had been 
appointed as Judges of the American Supreme Court. 1 The appointment of 
Mr. Felix Frank Furter to the Supreme Court of America may be cited as an 
example, Mr. Frame Furter was a Professor of Law at Harvard University be- 
fore his appointment to the Supreme Court. In India, so far, no non-practis- 
ing lawyer has been appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court. 

Every person who is appointed as a Judge or the Supreme Court before 
entering upon his office has to make and subscribe an oath or affirmation be- 
fore the President, or some other person appointed in that behalf by him.* 


Tenure and Removal of Judges.- A judge of the Supercme Court shall hold 
office until he attains the age of 65 years. The age of Judge of the Supreme 
Court shall be determined by such authority and in such manner as Parliament 


1. Article 124(6). 

2 - ^ommnsion n I C t3 ', a ' m POrl °, n c, B *v rm of , Judicial Administration, Vot. I. pp. 
' ^ 17, Vot- 111, p, 2J4, View of Ann&ihsayanam Ayyengar who had 

sunoorfed the provision. 1 ” 6 

3. Article 124. (6). 



221 


THE UNION JUDICIARY 


255 


contempt ofhis own court or of any other court in the same manner as any 
other individual is liable. However, this section shall not apply to any obser- 
vations or remarks made by him regarding a subordinate court in an appeal or 
revision pending before him. 

The following acts or publications will not amount to contempt— 

(a) Innocent publication and its distribution. 

lb) Fair and accurate report of judicial proceedings. 

(c) Fair criticism of judicial act 

(d) Complaint made in good faith against presiding officers of subordinate 
courts (below High Court). 

(c) Publication of fair and accurate report of a judicial proceeding before 
a court sitting in camera. 

A Contempt of Court may be punished with simple imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to 6 months or with fine which may extend to Rs. 2.000 
or with both. 

2. Original Jurisdiction— Article 131.— The Supreme Court has original 
jurisdiction in any dispute 

(a) between the Government of India and one or more States, 

(b) between the Government of India and any State or States on one side 
and one or more other States on the other, 

(c) between two or more States. 1 

The Supreme Court in its original jurisdiction cannot entertain any suits 
brought by private individuals against tbe Government of India. The dispute 
relating to the original jurisdiction of the Court must involve a question 
(whether of law or fact) on which tbe existence of a legal right depends. This 
means that the Court has no jurisdiction in matters of political nature. The term 
‘legal right’ means a right recognised by law and capable of being enforced by 
the power of a Slate but not necessarily in a coutt of law. 1 

In Stale of Karnataka v. Union of India* the Central Government appoint- 
ed a Commission of Inquiry against the Chief Minister of Karnataka under 
section 3 of tbe Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952, on charges of corruption, 
nepotism, favouritism and misuse of Government power. The plaintiff State of 
Karnataka filed a suit under Art. 131 of the Constitution for a declaration that 
the appointment of Inquiry was illegal and ultra vires on the grounds (1) that 
the Commission of Inquiry Act, 1952, does not authorise the Central Govern- 
ment to constitu.e such a commission in regard to matters falling exclusively 
within the sphere of State Legislative and executive powers, and (2) that if the 
provisions of the Act do so empower, they are ultra vires for the contravention 
of tbe terms of Constitution as well as tbe federal structure implicit and accept- 
ed as an inviolable basic feature of the Constitution. The defendant Union of 
India raised a preliminary objection that since the inquiry is against the Chief 
Minister and certain other Ministers as individuals and not against the State 
of Karnataka, the suit under Art. 13J is not thercofre maintainable. 

The Supreme Court by a majority of 4—3 held that plaintiff’s suit is 

1. Article 111. 

2. United Province v. Go\ernot .General, A. I. R. 1939 F. C 58. 

P 3. (1978) 1IS.C.J. 190. 



254 


CONST ITUI ION AL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


Salaries and allowances.— The judges shall be paid such salaries as are 
specified in the Second Schedule. He shall also be entitled to such privileges 
and allowances as may be determined by Parliament by law. Until such law 
is passed by the Parliament they are entitled to such allowances and privileges 
which are specified in the Second Schedule. 1 2 3 

Seat of the Supreme Court.— The seat of the Supreme Court is Delhi. 
However, the Chief Justice of India may require it to sit in such other places 
with the previous permission of the President.- 1 

JURISDICTION OF THE SUPREME COURT 

(I) A Court of Record. — Article 129 makes the Supreme Court a ‘court 
of record’ and confers all the powers of such a court including the power to 
punish for its contempt. A Court of Record is a court whose records are 
admitted to be of evidentiary value and they are not to be questioned when 
they are produced before the court. Once a court is made a Court of Record, 
its power to punish for contempt necessarily folllows from that position. 9 
The power to punish for Contempt of Court has been expressly conferred on 
the Supreme Court by our Constitution. 

Prior to the enactment of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, the expres- 
sion ‘Contempt of Court’ was to be defined by the Courts. The definition given 
by the court was very wide. U was feared that this wide power was likely to be 
misused by the Courts. Out of the zeal to protect and maintain the dignity 
of the court and of its judges, the court may exercise this power on flimsy 
grounds. In an uoreported case a lower court in Uttar Pradesh punished a 
lawyer for contempt of court for chewing betel while cross-examining wit- 
nesses in a criminal case, because in tbe opinion of the judge this was an 
interference with the proper administration of justice. It was, therefore, 
suggested that the scope of expression “Contempt of Court” must be defined 
as soon as possible. This extraordinary power must be sparingly exercised 
only where the public interest demands. 4 

Consequently, the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, was enacted by the 
Parliament. The Act defines the powers of courts for punishing contempt of 
courts and regulates their procedure. It also provides for judges to be tried 
for Contempt of Court. According to section 2 of the Act, 'Contempt of Court’ 
includes both ‘civil’ and ‘criminal’ contempt. 'Civil contempt’, means wilful 
disobedience to any judgment, decree, direction, order, writ or other process 
of a court or wilful breach of an undertaking given to a court. ‘Criminal 
contempt’ means the publication (whether by words, spoken or written or 
by signs or by visible representations or otherwise) of any matter or doing of 
any act whatsoever which.— (i) scandalises or tends to scandalise, or lowers or 
tends to lower the authority of any court, or (ii) prejudices, or interferes or 
tends to interfere with, the due course of any judicial proceeding, or (iii) 
interferes or tends to interfere with, or obstructs or tends to obstruct, the 
administration of justice to any other manner. 

A judge or magistrate or other person acting judicially shall be liable for 

1. Article 125— At present the Chief Justice’s salary is fixed at Rs. 5.000 p. m. and other 

judges get Rs. 4,000 p. m. 

2. Article 130. 

3. C. A. D- Vrf. VIII, p. 852 (882). 

4. Hira Lai v. State of U. P., A. I. R. 1954 S. C. 743 at p. 747. 



I HE UNION JUDICIARY 


255 


221 


contempt of bis own couit or of any other court in the same manner as any 
other individual is liable. However, this section shall not apply to any obscr* 
vations or remarks made by him regarding a subordinate court io an appeal or 
revision pending before him. 

The following acts or publications will not amount to contempt— 

(a) Innocent publication and its distribution. 

(b) Fair and accurate report of judicial proceedings. 

(c) Fair criticism of judicial act 

(dt Complaint made in good faith against presiding officers of subordinate 
courts (below High Court). 

(c) Publication of fair aad accurate report of a judicial proceeding before 
a court sitting in camera. 

A Contempt of Court may be punished with simple imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to 6 months or with fine which may extend to Rs. 2.000 
or with both. 

2. Original Jurisdiction— Article 111.— The Supreme Court has original 
jurisdiction in any dispute : — 

(a) between the Government of India and one or more States, 

(b) between the Government of India and any State or Stales on one side 
and one or more other States on the other, 

(c) between two or more Slates. 1 

Tbe Supreme Court in its original jurisdiction cannot entertain any suits 
brought by private individuals against the Government of India. The dispute 
relating to the original jurisdiction of the Court must involve a question 
(whether of law or fact) on which the existence of a legal right depends. This 
means that the Court has no jurisdiction in matters of political nature. The term 
•legal right’ means a right recognised by law and capable of being enforced by 
the power of a State but not necessarily in a court of law.* 

In Stale of Karnataka v. Union of India,* the Central Government appoint- 
ed a Commission of Inquiry against the Chief Minister of Karnataka under 
section 3 of the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952, on charges of corruption, 
nepotism, favouritism aDd misuse of Government power. The plaintifT State of 
Karnataka filed a suit under Art. 131 of the Constitution for a declaration that 
the appointment of Inquiry was illegal and ultra vires on the grounds (I) that 
the Commission of Inquiry Act, 1952, does not authorise the Central Govern- 
ment to conslilu.e such a commission in regard to matters falling exclusively 
within the sphere of State Legislative and executive powers, and (2) that if the 
provisions of the Act do so empower, they are ultra vires for the contravention 
of the terms of Constitution as well as the federal structure implicit and accept- 
ed as an inviolable basic feature of the Constitution. The defendant Union of 
fndia raised a preiYminary cAjecrtbir <&xc sfuce rde mquiYy is against (6e Cflief 
Minister and certain other Ministers as individuals and not against tbe State 
of Karnataka, the suit under Art. 131 is not thereofre maintainable. 

The Supieme Court by a majority of 4 — 3 held that plaintiff’s suit is 

1. Article til. 

2. United Province v. Governor .General, A. 1. R. 1939 F. C 58. 

3. (1978) II S. C. J. 190. 



256 


CONST mmQNAL LAW OP INDIA 


^Cbap 


maintainable. Tbe Union of India, acting through the Central Government, 
could be said to represent the whole of the people of each individual State and 
their interests. When differences arise between the representative of the State 
and those of the whole people of India on questions of interpretation of the 
Constitution, Beg, C. J. said it appears to be too technical an agrument to be 
accepted that a suit does not lie under Art. 131 of the Constitution. It is true 
that there is a distinction between the ‘'State” and the “State Government.” 
But it cannot be accepted that any action or incapacity of the Government 
may not affect the State and the State would not be interested in it. There is 
integral relationship between the “State” and the “State Government”. Any 
action which affects the State Government or the Ministers ia their capacity as 
Ministers would raise a matter in which the State would be concerned. The 
claims of the State Government are the claims of the State. The State acts 
through its Ministers. The acts of Ministers are acts, of the State. 

It is not necessary under Art. 131 that tbe plaintiff should have some legal 
right of its own to enforce. It only requires that tbe dispute must be one which 
involves a question “on which the existence or extent of legal right depended.” 
The plaintiff must of course be a party to the disput e and obviously it cannot 
be a party to the dispute unless it is affected by it. The State has sufficient 
interest to maintain a suit under Art. 131 because the action of the Central 
Government against the State effect the interest of the Ministers who exercise 
its powers. The word “right” is used in An. 131, Bhagwati, J., said, “in a 
generic sense and not according to its stria meaning. In its generic sense it 
includes not only right in the strict sense, but “aoy ad vintage or benefit 
conferred upon a person by a rule of law.” 

As regards tbe contention of ultra tires tbe Supreme Court held that tbe 
appointment of Commission of Inquiry against the Chief Minister and other 
Ministers of the State under section 3 of the above Act is valid and does not 
effect the federal structure as implicit in the basic feaure of the Constitution, 
la democratic countries the statute can provide for inquiries of the kind which 
are meant to be conducted under the Commission of Inquiry Act. The object 
of the Act is to enable the machinery of the democratic Government to function 
more efficiently and effectively. It could hardly be construed as an Act meant 
to thwart democratic method or Government. The kind of federation estab- 
lished in India has a strong unitary bias with power given to the Central 
Government or supervision in certain circumstances of State Government. 
Hence, it cannot be said that the Centre can take no action which results in 
interference with Governmental functions of a State Government. The Central 
Government, has power under Art. 356 to order an inquiry for the purposes 
of the satisfaction required by Art. 356. The machinery provided by the Com- 
mission of Inquiry Act could be utilised to decide whether action under Art 
356 is really called for. 

The original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, however, does not extend 
to the following matters : 

(1) The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court shall not extend a dispute 
arising out of any treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sonaJ 
or other similar instrument which was executed before- the com- 
mencement of the Constitution and continues to be in operation 
or which provides that the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court shall 
not extend to such a dispute. (Art 131, Proviso). 

(2) Under Article 262 Parliament may by law exclude the jurisdiction 



111b Union Judiciary 


25 1 


of the Supreme Court in disputes with respect to the use, distribu- 
tion or control of the water of any inter-State river or river valley. 

— • f of<» alcr, t-ielinted from 


Uon or control or me waici , ' 

Mailers referred to the Finance Commission are also excluded from 
(3) “fodginai jurisdiction of the Supreme Court (Article 280). 

- . - k.tmaan iW* Union and the 


the original junsaiwiuu u. ^ ' ' 

(4) The adjustment of certain expenses between the Union and the 
State (Article 290). 


aiaic tnuK-ts. 

priate proceedmgj for th f ; toissoc di[ectloils or orders or 

Sinehtdmg S the nature of hoheax corpu,, maadaaarr. ptohtbmon and 

certiorari whichever may be apporpnate 

. . j.. ii,. .nrnrrymFnl nf the Funda- 


certioran wUicnevcr uwj “rr—r 

., „ „ rtll t«v remedv for the enforcement ot the runda- 
, Mt“- d ht« 32 iKdtMhb At?ie!e a person can directly go to the Supreme 
S The Supreme Coutt has thus been constituted the pto.ector and guatan- 
tor of the Fundamental Rights. 


appellate jurisdiction 


Ar.iciP 112 -The Supreme Court is the highest Court of Appeal in the 
Article 132.- t&e f this Court run throughout the country. It can 

country. .The ^" t t a ?£‘;SSjction and powers of the Supreme Court in their 
be truly than those exercised by the High Ojurtt of any 

c D Sy a ?n tKommonweaUh or by the Supreme Court of the U. S. A. 


country in the , ...... 

. . , f ol r: rm ,,i* e action to be followed in exercise of writ jurisdic- 
Prmciple of af [‘ rm “ l . sjSSEtion the Supreme Court, should not adopt 
exercise of the writ j stop striking down a law, but it should 

a rigid attitude of ’ 8 SUPC est ways and means to remedj the 


a rigid attitude of JJfgjl V e * suggest ways and means to remedy the 
adopt affirmative attitude, i. ■« » * This principle of affirmative action has 
situation arising out of its decision, ij of state of Kerala v. T, P. 

been laid by the ' S U P«“ Government scheme of admission to medical colleges 
Roshna .* In that case a u Court. Tbe Court, however, did not stop 

was declared onconsUluUon invalid but it suggested possible methods 

at the stage of declaring the Sticaking for the majority Mr. Justice Krishna 
for implementing us Jddgmen. Speau g declaring that the scheme 

Ayer observed -'we arc unabk ^ ^ ^ 

of admission is ultra vir * for COQt rolliog its repercussions call for 

to tbe medical college l P lhe ; u d gm ent of the High Court in the 
judicial response. Had we hio ^ lhc f romu | a of admission’*, the Court 

conventional form of merely q & ateJ the malady, confusion, agitation, 
said, “, lhe " mCdy n, of the grievaoce and the fruit of the writ are not 
paralyse. The lootonti ^ . advcrsary system’ (parties) makes the 

individual but aitlonally speaking, the community orientation of 

judge a mere umpire, I Sable in the Third Word remedial jurisprudence, 
the judicial f“ nct '°“ s * ioU) b affirmative structuring of redress so as to mate 

transforms the courts pow , nc ; a ii v relevant/- Frustration of invalidity is 
it P" s »“" l .jSTty folHmcnt of legality is compkmtntxry. Thi! principle 
part 9 f the judicial auiy, Qur j uiisd , ctl0 n under Art. 136 and 32. 
ofaffirmaive Court can be divided into 


- s — c °““ “ 

four main categories . 

1. a. l.R. 1979 S C.765. 

Const. 33 



258 CONSHTUltONAL LAW OP INDIA [Chap. 


(a) constitutional matters, 

(b) civil matters, 

(c) criminal matters, 

(d) special leave to appeal* 

1. Appeal la constitutional matters.— Under Article 132 (I) an appeal 
shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or final order of 
a High Court whether in civil, criminal or other proceedings, if the High Court 
certifies under Art. 1 34 A ( added by the 44th Amendment Act , J978) that the case 
involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Consti- 
tution. Where such a certificate is given (or such leave is granted) any party 
in the case may appeal to the Supreme Court on the ground that any such 
question as aforesaid has been wrongly decided [and, with the leave of the 
Supreme Court, on any other ground]— Bracketed portion has been omitted 
by the Constitution 44 1 h Amendment Act. 1978. 

The object of the 44th Amendment is to avoid delay in granting certificate 
by the High Court for appeal to the Supreme Court. Under the new Article 
134A the High Court can grant a certificate for appeal (o the Supreme 
Court under Art. 132 cither on its own, motion or on 'oral' application of the 
aggrieved party immediately after passing the judgment, decree or final 
order. The Amendment therefore omits Cl. (2) of Art. 132 relating to 
grant of special leave by the Supreme Court in cases where the High Court 
refuses to give a certificate. Such cases will be regulated by Art. 136 under 
which the Supreme Court may grant special leave to appeal. Prior to this, the 
High Courts could do so only on the application of the aggrieved party. Un- 
der the new Article, it can now grant a certificate on its own motion if it 
deems fit 

Under Art. 132(1) three conditions arc necessary for the grant of 
certificate by the High Court 

(1) the order appealed must be against a judgment, decree or final 
order made by the High Court in civil, criminal or other pro- 
ceedings, 

(2) the case should involve a question of law as to the interpretation of 
the Constitution, and 

(3) the question involved in such constitutional interpretation must be 
a question of law. 

The word* ‘other proceedings' include all proceedings other than civil 
and criminal ; they include ‘revenue proceedings’ which includes proceedings 
under the State Tax Act or the Income Tax Act, etc. Secondly, the case 
must involve a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Con- 
stitution. A question is not a substantial question of law which has been 
decided by the Supreme Court in a previous case but if there is a di (Terence 
of opinion on any question of law among High Courts and there is not direct 
decision of the Supreme Court on that point it would be a substantia] question 
of law.* 

An appeal against High Court’s decision would only He to the Supreme 
Court when its decision amounts to a final order. No appeal lies against an 
order of the High Court unless the order amounts to a final order, i e. the 


1, Kmhnaswami v. Governor-Geacral-in-Countil. A.I.R. 1947 F. C. 37. 



22 } 


THE ONION JUDICIARY 


259 


order which puts to an end to the suit or other proceedings. If after the 
order, the suit is still alive, L e. in which the right to be still determined, no 
appeal would lie. 

In The Election Commission v. Venkata Rao, 1 a question was raised as 
to whether appeal lay to the Supreme Court from a decision of a single judge. 
The Supreme Court answered the question in affirmative. But this can only be' 
done in very exceptional cases, where direct appeal to the Supreme Court is 
necessary and in view of the grave importance of the case an early decision is 
required in public interest. 3 

In an appeal before the Supreme Court, the appellant is not entitled to 
challenge the propriety of the decision of the High Court appealed against on 
the ground other than that on which the certificate was granted by the High 
Court, except with the leave of the Supreme Court. 9 Such leave would normally 
be granted by the Supreme Court where the trial before the High Court has 
resulted in the grave miscarriage of justice. 4 Even after the certificate is granted 
by the High Court, the Supreme Court may refuse to hear the appeal if it is 
satisfied that the appeal is not competent. 4 

2. Appeal in Civil Cases— Article 133.— Prior to the 30th Amendment 
Act, 1972, under Article 133 an appeal could go to the Supreme Court in civil 
cases from any judgment, decree or final order of the High Court if the High 
Court certified (a) that the amount or value of the subject-matter of the dispute 
both in the first instance and also on an appeal is not less than Rs. 20,000 ; 
or (b) that the judgment, decree or final order involves directly or indirectly 
same claim or question respecting property of the like amount or value, 
i. e. Rs. 20,000 ; or (c) that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme 
Court. 

Article 133 as amended by the Constitution 30th Amendment Act, 1972, 
provides that an appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court only if the High Court 
certifies under Article 134-A ( added by the 44th Amendment Act, 1978 ) — 

(a) that ihe case involves a substantial question of Jaw of general im- 

portance, and 

(b) that in the opinion of the High Court the said question needs to be 
decided by the Supreme Court. 

Thus the amendment removes the condition of monetary value that an 
appeal could go to the Supreme Court only when the amount or value in dis- 
pute was not less than Rs. 20,000. After this amendment an appeal can go to 
the Supreme Court only if the High Court certifies that the case involves the 
substantial question of law of general importance. 

The amendment seeks to give effect to the recommendations of the law 
Commission in the 44th and 45th report in Civil Appeals by the Supreme 
Court. According to the Law Commission ‘the amendment* would curtail rhe 
number of appeals which are filed in Supreme Court merely on ihe valuation 
being satisfied without any merit in them. 

). Election Commission v. Venkata Rao, A.T.R. 1953. S. C- 210 at p. 212. 

2. Union of India v. Jyoti Prakasb, A. L R. 1971 S. C. 1093. 

3. Darshan Singh v. Slate of Punjab, A. 1. R. 1953 S. C. S3. 

4. Than Singh v. Superintendent, A. 1. R. 1964 S. C. 1419. 

5. Sycdana Tahet v. Stale of Bombay, A. I. R. 1958 S C. 253, 



258 


CONSnTUIlQNAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


(a) constitutional matters, 

(b) civil matters, 

(c) criminal matters, 

(d) special leave to appeal. 

1. Appeal in constitutional matters.— Under Article 132 (1) an appeal 
shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or final order of 
a High Court whether in civil, criminal or other proceedings, if the High Court 
certifies under Art. 124 A ( added by the 44th Amendment Act, 1978) that the case 
involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Consti- 
tution. Where such a certificate is given (or such leave is granted) any party 
in the case may appeal to the Supreme Court on the ground that any such 
question as aforesaid has been wrongly decided (and, with the leave of the 
Supreme Court, on any other ground]— Bracketed portion has been omitted 
by the Constitution 44th Amendment Act, 1978. 

The object of the 44th Amendment is to avoid delay in granting certificate 
by the High Court for appeal to the Supreme Court. Under the new Article 
134A the High Court can grant a certificate for appeal to the Supreme 
Court under Art. 132 either on its own motion or on ‘oral’ application of the 
aggrieved party immediately after passing the judgment, decree or final 
order. The Amendment therefore omits Cl. (2) of Art. 132 relating to 
grant of special leave by the Supreme Court in cases where the High Court 
refuses to give a certificate. Such cases will be regulated by Art. 136 under 
which the Supreme Court may grant special leave to appeal. Prior to this, the 
High Courts could do so only on the application of the aggrieved party. Un- 
der the new Article, it can now grant a certificate on its own motion if it 
deems fit. 

Under Art. 132 (1) three conditions are necessary for the grant of 
certificate by the High Court 

(1) the order appealed must be against a judgment, decree or final 
order made by the High Court in civil, criminal or other pro- 
ceedings, 

(2) the case should involve a question of law as to the interpretation of 
the Constitution, and 

(3) the question involved in such constitutional interpretation must be 
a question of law. 

The words ‘other proceedings* include all proceedings other than civil 
and criminal ; they include ‘revenue proceedings’ which includes proceedings 
under the State Tax Act or the Income Tax Act. etc. Secondly, the case 
must involve a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Con- 
stitution. A question is not a substantial question of law which has been 
decided by the Supreme Court in a previous case but if there is a difference 
of opinion on any question of law among High Courts and there is not direct 
decision of the Supreme Court on that point it would be a substantial question 
of law. 1 

An appeal against High Court’s decision would only lie to the Supreme 
Court when its decision amounts to a final order. No appeal lies against an 
order of the High Court unless the order amounts to a final order, l e. the 

j. Krishnaswami v. Goverooi-Geneial-in-Council. A.l.R. 1947 F. C. 37. 



22 j THE UNION JUDICIARY 

by the High Court on the ground that “°m^rtanl°mSen^Uvidenee ns 
gSlr f.SSfSSL’SSS-Sc High&trt.ere dideren. from .hose 

0f under Art. 133 ‘he^n. “””° 1 * a "°'' C<i " °™ 

grounds no. raised before the Lone, Co [q ^ , 3J „ 

m “;;T“.h P oI,T:r,e:.e i ,he„i e .tCourt, ( 3,»ilh —of, he 

High Court. «,)<— An Appeal lies to the 

(a) Without a certificate -Art ide 1 U t ^ if the High Court 

^sr^sr'.ssss 

sentenced hint to death. ^ ,g c otdet of conviction and has 

But if Iho Htgb 0« *J% n„ anneal w.uld lie to the Supreme Court, 
ordered the acquttt ( c)._Under clause (e) an appeal lies to 

lb) With • ecrtidcite-Artirte W fe£ ond „ A „icle 134-AJo Mcjbyihe 

, he Supreme Court , the High Court a a £ , ^ fot appeal to On Supreme 

44th Amendment Act, IW 
Court. 


. rnnrtto erant fitness certificate in the criminal 
The pow er of the High discretion is a judicial one and must 

cases Ua discretionary FO^.^^ * e , flushed liens ^h.ch gosern these 
be judicially exercised along ith me entire gnidiDg pnnciples for the 

matters.* The Supreme.Court has »ai ^ High Court should grant 

^gk^out^j^^gy^rlret^trt^beea erceptiona^ciKnJrastancea.e^g.^nheTe 

SSJESSlS g^Tioiustieeh^bee.^- no substantial 

S’ ulSobS- Normally toe r Court d« “ 

SS5£& “T'“S"or' ! co”“ ‘S'rn^balS^tence nbieh 

$£. irSd'^he^rontrdi^f ^o 

S“v. ””C utoteS »“i. 5 inTnnd W are binding on the Court, 

courts belo . . . ,34 (c>, the Supreme Court is not 

« is to be noted that under ^liele ‘34 eQtetUm ap pe 3 ls 
rm^&CoS'o^lTon^Sve A limited criminal appellate 

T \SU 

t£ss r^^"^ ,9s,iai43 - 

4, * 1 R. 1971 S. C- 759. 



260 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


The requirement of giving certificate under Article 133 has now become 
very stringent in view of the amendment of clause (I) by the Constitution (30th 
Amendment) Act, 1971. It is not now sufficient if the case involves a substan- 
tial question of law of general importance but in addition to it the High Court 
should be of the opinion that such question needs to be decided by the Sup- 
reme Court. Further, the word ‘needs* suggests that there has to be necessity 
for a decision by a Supreme Court on the question, and such a necessity can 
be said to exist when, for instance, two views are possible regarding the ques- 
tion and the High Court takes one of the said views. Such a necessity can also 
be said to exist when a different view has been expressed by another High 
Court. It is thus apparent that there must be some imperative necessity arising 
from the fact and circumstances of the case before the Court can certify it to 
be fit one to prefer an appeal to Supreme Court. 1 

The pecuniary value of the subject-matter of the suit is of no considera- 
tion at all. There may be cases where the point in dispute cannot be measured 
in terms of money and yet the decisions may have far-reaching results, 3 e. g. 
where the case is one of great public or private importance.* 

The certificate of the High Court is not obtainable as a matter of right. 
It depends solely on the discretion of the High Couit. But the discretion is a 
judicial one and must be judicially exercised on well-established lines which 
govern these matters. But mere grant of certificate does Dot make it obliga- 
tory on the Supreme Court to entertain the appeal. It is still entitled to 
determine whether the certificate was rightly granted and whether the conditions 
prerequisite to grant were satisfied. In Nar Singh v. State of U. P„* it was 
held that if on the face of the order it is apparent that the Court has misdirected 
itself and considered that its discretion was fettered when it was not, or that it 
bad none, then the Supreme Court may either remit the case or exercise its 
discretion itself.* 

Civil Proceedings.— The expression ‘civil proceeding’ means proceedings in 
which a party asserts the existence of a civil right. A civil proceeding is one in 
which a person seeks to remedy by an appropriate process the alleged infringe- 
ment of bis civil rights against another person or the State and which, if the 
claim is proved, would result in the declaration expressly or impliedly of the 
right claimed and relief, such as, payment of debt, damages, compensation, etc. 
There is no ground for restricting the expression ‘civil proceedings' only to 
those proceedings which arise out of civil suits in proceedings which are tried 
as civil suits. Accordingly, a proceeding before a High Court under Article 226 
for a grant of writ constitutes a civil proceeding.® 

Under Article 133 the Supreme Court does not interfere with the con- 
current findings of fact by the lower courts and the High Courts unless it is 
shown that impportant and relevant evidence has been overlooked, or unless 
it is fully unsupported by evidence on record. 1 Thus in A/. M. B. Catholics v. 
T, Paulo Avira , 8 the Supreme Court interfered with the finding of fact made 

1. Union of India v. Hafiz Mohd., A. 1. R. 1975 Delta 77. 

2. Madan Gopai v. Slate of Orissa, A. L R. 1956 Orissa 71. 

3. Inda Devi v. Board of Revenue, A. L R. 1957 All. 1 16 

4. A- 1. R. 1954 S. C. 457. 

5. Rajindra Chand v. Mst. Sukhl, A. I. R- 1957 S. C. 2S9. 

6 Naram Rr w v. Ishwar Lai, A. I. R. 1965 S C. 1818. 

7. D. C Works Ltd. v. State of Saurastitra, A. 1. R. 1957 S. C. 264, 

g. A. I. R. 1959 S. C. 11 al p. 50. 



22 } 


TUB UNIOX JUDICIARY 


2 63 


consider the question of granting certificate immediately on the delivery of the 
judgment, decree, final order, or sentence concerned either on oral application 
by the party aggrieved or, if it deems fit to do so, on its own motion. 

Prior to this. High Court could graDt certificate only on the formal 
application of the aggrieved party, whereas under the new Article, the High 
Court can grant a certificate suo motu if it thinks fit. 

Transfer of cases from one High Court to another and withdrawal of cases 
from High Courts to Supreme Court — The new Article 139-A added by the (42od 
Amendment) Act, 1976, empowers the Supreme Court to transfer cases from any 
High Court to another High Court if it is expedient to do so for the end of 
justice, Clause (2) of Art. 139-A provides that if on an application made by 
the Attorney-General the Supreme Court is satisfied that involves the same 
questions of law or such questions arc substantial questions of general import- 
ance which is pending before it and before one or mote High Courts may 
withdraw the case and decide them itself. 

The 4!tb Amendment Act, 1978, retains this provision subject to the 
following modifications. It has substituted a new clause (1) for clause (I) of 
Art. 139-A which empowers the Supreme Court to withdraw cases from the 
High Courts “suo motu" i. e. itself, in addition to the power to withdraw cases 
on the application’ of the Attorney-General. Prior to this, the court could do 
so only on the application of the Attorney-General. 

Federal Court’s jurisdiction to be exercised by the Supreme Court — 
Article 135.— It is to be noted that before the commencement of the Constitu- 
tion there was a Federal Court in India. It was created by the Government 
of India Act, 1935. The Federal Court has now been abolished by the Consti- 
tution. Article 135 ''was included in the Constitution to enable the Supreme 
Court to exercise jurisdiction in cases which were not covered by Articles 133 
and 134, in respect of matters where the Federal Court had jurisdiction to 
entertain appeals, etc. from the High Charts under the previously existing law. 1 
But the Supreme Court shall exercise its jurisdiction under Article 135 if two 
conditions are satisfied ; 

(1) Articles 133 and 134 do not apply to the case. 

(2) It is a case in regard to which the Federal Court had the jurisdiction 
to entertain appeals. 

Appeal by special leave — Article 136.— Under Article 136 the Supreme 
Court is authorised to grant in its discretion special leave to appeal from (a) 
any judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order, (b) in any cause or 
matter, (c) passed or made by any couit or tribunal in the territory of India. 
The only exception to Ibis power of the Supreme Court is with regard to any 
judgment, etc, of any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating 
to the Armed Forces. 

This Article vests very wide powers in the Supreme Court. The power 
given under this Article is in the nature of a special or residuary power which 
are exercisable outside the purview of ordinary law (Articles 132 to 135 deal 
with ordinary appeals to the Supreme Court) in cases where the needs of jus- 
tice demand interference by the highest Court of the land. This Article is word- 
ed in the widest possible terms. U vesta in I be Supreme Court a plenary 
jurisdiction in the matter of entertaining and hearing appeals by granting spe- 

j. JiDitJbu Reddi v. The Slate, A. t- R. t9Sl S. C. 124. 



262 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INOIA (Chap. 

jurisdiction is conferred upon the Supreme Court by Article 134. It is limi- 
ted in the sense that even the Supreme Court has been constituted as a court 
of criminal appeal in exceptional cases where the demand of justice requires 
interference by the highest Court of the land. 

Parliament is, however, empowered under Article 134 (2) to extend the 
appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in criminal matters. In exer- 
cise of the powers under clause (2) of Art. 134 Parliament enacted the Supreme 
Court enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1970 . Section 2 of 
the above Act provides as follows — 

“Without prejudice to the powers conferred on the Supreme Court by 
clause (1) of Article 134 of the Constitution, an appeal shall lie 
to the Supreme Court from any judgment, final order or sentence 
in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India 
if the High Court — 

(a) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person 
and sentenced him to imprisonment for life or to imprisonment 
for a period of not less than ten years ; 

(b) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court 
subordiaate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the 
accused person and sentenced him to imprisonment for life or 
to imprisonment for a period of not less then ten years." 

Thus under clause (2) of the Act an accused, who have been convicted 
for an offence under section 302/34 I. P. C. ; can prefer an appeal to the 
Supreme Court as a matter of right. But In an appeal by special leave under 
Art. 136 the Supreme Court docs not undertake to reappreciate evidence. 
However, in a situation where the Sessions Judge register the entire prosecution 
evidence as unworthy of belief, but the High Court implicitly relies on almost 
the entire evidence, the Supreme Court would be bound to examine the evid- 
ence for the purpose of ascertaining whether there has been any such error of 
law or fact as to vitiate the findings in the impugned judgment. 1 

Certificate lor appeal to Supreme Court— Art. 134-A — The Constitution 
{4 Ith Amendment) Act. has amended Articles 132, 133 and 1 34 and inserted a 
Dew Article 134-A. for regulating the grant of the certificate Tor appeal to the 
Supreme Court by the High Courts. The object of this new provision is to 
avoid delay Id cases going to the Supreme Court in appeal from the judgment, 
decree, final order or sentence of the High Court. Article 134-A is as follows : 

"Every High Court, passing or making a judgment, decree, final order or 
sentence, referred to in clause (1) of Articles 132 or '33 or 134— 

(a) may, if it deems fit so to do, on its own motion, and 

(b) shall, if an oral application is made, by or on behalf of the party 

aggrieved, immediately afier the passing or making of such judg- 
ment, decree, final order or sentence, • • 

determine as soon as may be after such passing or making, the question 
whether a certificate of the nature referred to in clause (1) of Articles 132, J33 
or sub-Cl. (c) of clause (1) of Art. 134, may bo given in respect of that case.” 

Thus under the new Article 134-A it is obligatory on the High Court to 


1. Muibu Naiker v. State of T- N,, A. I. R. 1978 S. C. 647, 



22] 


TUB UNION JUDICIARY 


265 


and ‘own possession’ used in S. II (I) (b) of the J. & K. Houses and Shops 
Rent and Control Act and thus misapplied the law and overlooked some of 
the essential features of the eviction Act. the Supreme Court had to enter into 
• he merit of the case in order to prevent grave and substantial injustice to the 
appellant who was evicted as a result of the above interpretation of 
the law. 1 

In an appeal under Article 136 the Supreme Court does not allow the 
appellant to raise new plea for the first time.-* 

In criminal cases.— The power of the Supreme Court under Article 136 
has more frequently been invoked in criminal appeals. In criminal cases the 
Court will not grant special leave to appeal unless it is shown that special and 
exceptional circumstances exist, or it is established that grave injustice has 
K-Z^VinP md that the case in question is sufficiently important to warrant a 
“ J" decision .he Supreme Con,.. In Haripad a Dtp v. Stale of 

I reSam.el* UK Supreme Court held that It will grant special eave only rf 
here has been gross miscarriage of justice ot departure from legal procedure 
SE a 7 \K vitiates the whole trial or tf the finding of fact were such 
as shorting to the judicial conscience of the Court. 

Article 136 is worded in wide terms and the power conferred by it is 
not hedged in by any technical hurdles. This o.er,id.ng and rapt, anal power 
f. hnwnmr tt be exercised spariogly and only in fnrlheranee of cause ofjusl.ee 
Thus when the judgment under appeal has resulted m grave miscarriage or 
inus wncu nr mistake >o the reading of evidence or by 


iiKtice bv some misapprehension or mistake in - 

“material evidence then it is not only empowered but is excepted to 

cause of justice/ ‘ 

Court to scrutinis 

sneciai circumstances in order to see that s - 

P • q done. It does' not confer a right of appeal on the party. 


m promote 'thecuuiT of justice/ Article 136 merely confers discre- 
interfere to p Court to scrutinise and to go into the evidence in 

order to see that substantial ant^ grave injustice has 

not been done. It does 

In Balak Ram v. State of U. P..« the Courtheldthat though the powers 
, A q,.nreme Court under Art. 136 are wide but in criminal appeals 
Ihe CoSrt h does P not interfere with the ‘ concurrent findings of fact' save id excep- 
tional circumstances. 

The SuDreroc Court does not function as a regular court of appeal in 
•S Normally, the High Court is a final Court of appeal and 

every "'“'"lease- on , y a C ourt of special jurisdiction. The Supreme Court 
w h ouW P noT therefore reappraise the^evideoce to determine the correcmess of 
would not tnereior t5onal circumstances where there is manifest 

findings unless * hc ”j ser : ous miscarriage of justice, for example, the forms of 
!S'iI£d “*&£££ olprlncipies » J f uttnl justice are violated or 
substantial and grave injustice has otherwise icsulted. 

coo ,^ H i£i?To b ^ 

Bega Begum v. AMul '^',,‘,5 s . C. 1061 : Rutmaui Bm v. State of 


Mam Subba R»» - j 

a M ,Y,9 « S. t-Iru «. Sfte o, U. P A. »• C •«*- 

S A ui;fs,ate.tU.P.._A.t.«.m>S.C..X5. 

. Mairu v. Stale of U. P., 

A I. K- 1974 5. C. 2165 
1960. 

Const. 34 


A. I. R. 1971 S. C. 1050. 

DuUChandv. Delhi Administration, A. I. R. IV 7> l. 



264 


CONJTlIUnONAL LAW OP INDIA 


k i5 dof judgment or order made by any Court or In- 
Dowtr it teoVV^V * tafy i. >R any proceeding* and Ibe exercise of tha 

and [hU C y ,0 th L C dlscrcllon ° r ‘ 1|C court unfettered by any rcslrktiom 

Article itself 1 ” CaDQOt *** curta ‘* cd by any legislation short of amending tfce 

SooicrafSl 1 , bcl ,"' ca , A' 1 ' 116 ““i Art,. 13J.I35.-The po»M cl It! 

conuloed ia ArticSu t S'l35 1“ “ ““ rc ""' J “ ill > “/ »f >ht hoiuliou 

Cout/oDiyaeaLii'^hl^r 13 ? 135 3 PP“ l «n be entertained by the Supreme 
not aualiLd S h/ iN ,hC £ oa l 0fdcr bjt uaJcr Article I J 6. the word ‘order’ is 

stf- ,ht 

the H?gh U Court l ? 2 l ? **1 a PP eal h'cs only against the Coal order of 

lease for anoeal VrJ * UDde .l Ar ‘icle 136 the Supreme Court caa grant special 
High Courf^csen L^ ,Vu° Un ''‘ li: - ffom a i subordinate court below the 
High Court or even where f?* ?* 10 * th * u *ual procedure of filing appeal in tb: 
vision for such an appeal * * aw a PP bca ble to the dispute does not make pro- 

wide disc™ ti*ona rv^nnleJi cl . ear . l hat the Supreme Court is vested with ver) 
such a wide power a*rt£ JV* i° lhc fitQC “ of things that it should have 
tionary power j, to si e.. 8 ^ Court of the country. But bow this d»cK- 
itself in Pritam Singh v fh e ira/e* J - ha * bccn cxplaincJ b y * he Supreme Court 

ilillo T be‘ P 0 *" with which lbi> Court ii icrtcd »«* 

only, and as Tar as possible , D m Q5 spc f ,al Icavc to appeal in exception! c«« 
jn granting special | fl v! a ; mo , r L c or ! CS1 . uniform standard should be adopeW 

before it under this A.iiri, 0 *il e w .* de ran C e of matters which can come op 

leave i 0 civil cases incrJmU t Dy v,rt .ue of this Article, wc can grant spec® 
come up before different T: 0 ^ cas . cs - in income-tax cases, in cases which can 
Ia0 - C. Mills v cSm/i2, J ‘ ?*, ,r *bunals and in a variety of other cases- 

be ‘°g an exceptional Tnd „t r °f.. Incom ‘ ^, IK D.,* the Court AWJthat it 

a °d with caution and onlv7 Crndln8 po * er ** 11 ha * to be exercised sp 311 ®* 1 * 
n.ii*« no1 P° ss ib)e to fett« specu, . cx, raodinary situations. Beyond tba*. 
rule.” t«ter the exercise of this power by any set formula or 

Normally the c 

Rnt bc L f,al court a ud the H?i>h?' Utt Joc * not inteife f c with concurrent findings 
But where the High Courf Un!css there is sufficient ground to do so. 

approach to the instant c ase *H S ° ,he - ,lial COUI ‘ ba « a legally »i*M 

law interpreting the scone -, n . d c ?! nm,tled a substantial and patcDtertof o> 
P d ambit of the words “reasonable requirement 

1. Basu, d. d * i 

2 ‘ Mill, 3 ' Dlnk v - n EmX«| 0 O 'r l nh he CoDJ,,,ution of tod, a. p. 233. 

Raghuri,^" ^Iway, A f . ® h *R ‘ ,^® k - c A - I-R. 1950S.C. 18$ ; 
locomt-ii S u, £h - A ' •• R! 1954 s R V 9 ^„ S c 22i - Sea alio Durg*Stunk* f ’. 
Kouh i i »***■ “ tn 8 al . A. R fq,F*„ S 3? : D- C. Mill, Lid. V. Commission" “ 

. „ , ' '• R - >«5 S. C. 42J 95y S - C - 6 * ;SaDgr»m Singh v. EleciiM Tnbun*'. 

7 A. I. R. 1950 s 

^ a.ir 19SJ8c> , «* 

5- Sutlan Ahtnaj » c, 

M- P . A. 1. R. 1975 SajK 1 ' 1 A ‘ «• R - 1975 S. C. 1828 ; Mehttb S.ngh v. Slate* 



266 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA [Chap. 

Court ought not to interfere with the order of acquittal passed by the trial 
court. If the High Court has set aside an order of acquittal the Supreme Court 
in appeal under Art. 136 will examine the evidence only if the High Court has 
failed to apply correctly the principles governing appeals against acquittal. 
Thus where the Supreme Court found that the judgment of the High Court 
was manifestly wrong it re-appraised the evidence and acquitted the accused 
giving him benefit of doubt.* In M. R. Dhawan v. Pratap Bhanu , a the appel- 
lant was tried by the trial Magistrate and was discharged on the ground that 
no prima facie case was established against him. The Sessions Judge affirmed 
the order of the Magistrate. The appellant filed a revision before the High 
Court. The High Court, on the facts and circumstances of the case, arrived 
at a finding of fact that a prima facie case made out and set aside the order of 
discharge passed by the Magistrate and upheld by the Sessions Judge and 
directed that the appellant be committed to the Court of Session. The Supreme 
Court held that when it is obvious that the High Court has applied its mind 
to the facts and circumstances of the case, it is DOt for the Supreme Court 
to go into the sufficiency of the material before the Magistrate which may 
afford justification for passing an order of discharge. This Court would not 
normally interfere with the discretion exercised by the High Court. 

When leave is limited to certain grounds it would not be appropriate to 
put a very narrow and grammatical construction of the grounds. More often 
grounds set out in special leave applications are overlapping and often repeated 
and even occasionally vague. Therefore, as far as possible the grounds should 
not be very strictly construed or should not be construed in such a manner 
as to make the special leave guarantee under Art. 136 self-defeating. Attempt 
of the Court roust be to fiod out what was the grievance or contention and 

the discretion should not be exercised to refuse the leave on the ground that 
the grounds cannot be ascertained. 8 

In petty matters the Court may refuse to decide even on a question of 
law. It is not as if once special leave is granted the Court is bound to decide 
every question of law, be it big, small or petty. 1 * 3 4 5 

In Charan Singh v. State of Punjab , s where in an appeal against convic- 
tion in a murder case and also the reference under section 374, Cr. P. C. for 
confirmation of death sentence, the High Court without considering the'evi-' 
dence of the witness observed that all the witness examined discussing evidence 
of the eye-witness after making only a general reference by the prosecution 
inspired full confidence the Supreme Court considered it proper to examine 
the evidence itself. It was essential for the High Court to have re-appraised 
the evidence adduced in the case and come to an independent conclusion as 
to whether the guilt of the accused has been proved or not. 

When special leave is obtained by making false and misleading state- 
ment of material fact the Supreme Court will be justified in revoking the leave 
to appeal. 6 


1. Mohd. Ilyas v. Stale of U. P., A. I. R. 1974 S. C. 1980. 

Z A. I R 1978 S.C. 1011. 

3. Balai Chandra v. Shewdhare Jadav, A. 1. R. 1978 S. C 1062. 

4. Management of D. T. C. v. Majatay, A. I. R. 1978 S. C. 764. 

5. A. I, R. 1975 S C. 246. 

6. Udai Cband v, Shaoker Lai, A. I. R. 1978 S. C 765. 



22 ] 


THH UNION JUDICIARY 


267 


Tribunal. . 

_ t . ..... t-ifi , he nower or the Supreme Court to grant special leave 

the ambit ot Art. no. 1 . t*. nresen t ia a given case while 

necessary that all the tests laid i ac kfog It is, however, absolutely 

some tests may be P«senj ° y ^ come ^jfhin the ambit of Art. 136 (l) 

necessary that .the auUwnty “ i b / lhe State and is vesled with some function 
as tribunal must be constituted y paI ticular test must be present while 

of judicial powers » » £ p , ascot at the same time.* Thus a 

some ortho although not a couit having ail the attributes 

tribunal is a body of aulbori y :° dicia | po^r to adjudicate on question of 
of a court which is vested wth^iwtoa . p^ mannera However, 

law or fact affecting the , ^|c“ havc purely adtninislralive or executive 

it does not include a tnbuna jceislativc functions without any quasi- 

- iht s " ict “ 

invested with certain ruucUo..ofcout.. of l ^ ^ ^ „ bj! htlJ 

In A - P • 7/ L. / tribunal as it is created under the Cons- 
that the Election “ £ law „i, h only administrative power but 

titution and w >ov«tea hc s, atCi however fractional it may be. 

also with resoWes disputes inter alia, between rival parties 

The Commission exclusively recognised political party for the purpose 
with regard to clmms fo * e lhc commission fulfils the essential tests of 

“VrtnafauSVX^hiu^ramhi. of Art. .36 of the Cous,i,u„ou 

, . rrnlrutia Tram IFays v. Calcutta Tramways Co. Ltd., it was 
a M that the^Su prciM^Cmutt can normally interfere wi.h the decision, arrived 
alb, “seTribSuab on the following grounds, where 

, . .. . ... : n excess of the jurisdiction conferred upon it 

0) tnbun a^ le ‘ Qf regulation creating it or where it ostensibly 

fa°b to eaereise. parent jurisdiction; 

,11 there is an apparent error on Ibe face of the deerstoa ; 

made in violation or principles of natural justice 
< 3 > i'nsi:g n d £..mb"a"d grave injustice ,0 patties t 
(41 the Tribunal ha. enooeonsl, applied well-accepted p, maple, of 
jurisdiction. 

UJas,a». SW MU Tofcrfani Ctum/,c the Supreme Couit held that 

4. A. I. R- c. Mitts U4- »• ComBiuuoQet of T **. W. B- 


Alemt-c ChemK»t> No 

,.A.IR. »*» s C 617 



268 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


the Conciliation Officer exercising power under the U P. Industrial Disputes 
Act is not a tribunal because it does not possess attributes of a court of 
justice. The Conciliation Officer is not required to sit in public, and formal 
pleading is required before him, he cannot examine witnesses, compel produc- 
tion of document, etc. He is not capable of giving a final judgment affecting 
the rights and obligation of the parties. In civil cases the special leave to 
appeal under Article 134 would not be granted unless some substantia] ques- 
tion of law or general public interest is involved. 

Advisory Jurisdiction (Article 143). — Art. 143 provides that if at any 
time it appears to the President that — 

(a) a question of law or fact has arisen or is likely to arise, and 

(b) the question is of such a nature and of such public importance that 
it is expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court upon it, he may 
refer the question for the advisory opinion of the Court. 

The Court may after such hearing, as it thinks fit, report to the President 
its opinion thereon. Under clause (2), ff the President refers to the Supreme 
Court matters which are excluded from its jurisdiction under the proviso to 
Article 131, the Court shall be bound to give its opinion thereon. 

There is no provision similar to this in the Constitution of the United 
States of America or in the Australian Constitution. Accordingly, the 
American Supreme Court and the High Court of Australia have refused to 
give advisory opinions to the Executive. They have held that the jurisdiction 
and powers of the Court extend ODly to the decisions of the concrete cases 
which come before the Court. But in Canada under section 60 of the Canadian 
Supreme Court Act, 1906, the Governor-General in Council may refer impor- 
tant question of law concerning certain matters to the Supreme Court for its 
advisory opinion. The Indian Supreme Court, like the Canadian Supreme 
Court, exercises the powers to give advisory opinion to the President. The 
Government of India Act, 1935. empowered the Governor-General to consult 
the Federal Court. Till the year 1978, seven references have been made to the 
Supreme Court under Art. 143 (1). They are (l) In re Delhi Laws Act case* in 
1951 ; (2) In re Kerala Education Bill 1 2 3 4 in 1958 ; (3) In re Berubari 3 in 1956 ; 
(4) In re The Sea Customs Act ' in 1962 ; (5) Keshav Singh case 5 6 in 1965 ; 
(6) In re Presidential Poll 6 in 1974 and (7) The Special Court Reference case 7 8 
in 1978. 

The use of the word “may” in Article 143 (1) indicates that the Supreme 
Court is not bound to answer a reference made to it by the President. In re 
Kerala Education Bill* the Supreme Court laid down the following principles 
to be followed in such cases ; 

(1) The Supreme Court has under clause (1) a discretion in the matter 
aDd in a proper case and for good reason refuse to express any 
opinion on the question submitted to it. 

1. A. I. R. 1951 S. C. 332. 

2. A. I. R. 1958 S. C.956. 

3. A. I. R. 1960 S. C. 84J. 

4. A. I. R. 1963 S. C. 1760. 

5. A. I. R. 1965 S. C. 741. 

6. A I. R 1974 S. C. 1682. 

7. Hindustan Times, 2 Dec. 1978. 

8. A I.R. 1958 S. C.956. 



22 } 


THE UNION JUDICIARY 


269 


(2) It is for the President to decide what question should be referred 
to the Court, and if he does not entertain any serious doubt on the 
other provisions it is not for aoy party to say that doubts arise also 
out of them. 

Accordingly, the President may formulate for advisory opinion of the 
Supreme Court questions of fact and law relating to the validity of provisions 
of the existing laws or in regard to the validity of provisions proposed to be 
included in the Bills which would come before the Legislature, or in respect of 
any other question of constitutional importance. 1 

In some decisions the Court had expressed the view that the advisory 
opinion of the Supreme Court under under Art. 143, though entitled to great 
respect was not binding on Courts, because it was not law within the meaning 
of Art. 141 and hence it was not binding on Courts. 

This view has now been changed in the recent Special Reference Case? 

In the recent Special Court Reference case,* under Art. 143 the 
Supreme Court has held that the Court is obliged to give its advisory opinion 
under Art. 1 <3 of the Constitution. Jn that case the question referred to the 
Court for its opinion was whether Parliament is empowered to establish Special 
Courts for the trial of emergency offences. A seven-member constitution bench 
ofthcSupicmc Court by 6-1 majority held that Parliament has power to 
establish Special Courts for trial of emergency offences, subject to certain 
procedural safeguards. The President had sought the opinion of the Court 
on the private member’s Bill introduced iu the Lok Sabha empowering the 
Government to set up Special Courts for the trial of emergency offences. 
The three procedural changes suggested by ibe Court are— (l) that only sitting 
and not retired High Court Judges should be appointed to the Special Court ; 
(2) appointments must be made with “the concurrence of" and not simply 
“in consultation with” the Chief Justice ; and (3) the accused must be given 
right to apply to Supreme Court for transfer of his case from one Special Court 
to another if be alleges bias. If these changes arc made in the Bill it would 
render the procedure "fair and just". All these amendments were acceptable 
to the Government. 

The Court rejected the preliminary objection that it is not bound to hear 
the reference. It was he«d that thc Court is obliged to answer the reference 
under Att. 143 of the Constitution. 

The Supreme Court also made it clear that tbe view of the court expres- 
sed in the exercise of hs advisory jurisdiction is binding on all courts. This 
implies that the legislation (establishing Special Court) can only be challenged 
in the Supreme Court. The judges said “It would be strange that a decision 
given by this Court on a question .of law in a dispute between two private 
parties should be binding on all courts in this country but the advisory opinion 
should bind no one at all even if, as in the instant case, it is given aficr issuing 
notice to all interested parties, after beariug every one concerned who 
desired to be heard, after the full consideration of the questions raised ia the 
reference." 

I In re under Article MJ o( tbe Consiitutioo lSpc«i*l Rrfatace So. I or \9U). A . , R 
1965 S. C. 745 at t».7S6. 

2. A. I. R Mr* S. C. +«. 

J. Ib*d. 



270 


C0NSI1TUT10NM. LKW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


However, the Supreme Court has strongly suggested that the reference 
should not be vague and general but must be made on ‘specific questions’, 
otherwise the court would not be bound to answer. 

Law declared by the Supreme Court to be binding on all courts— Article 
141.— The judgment of the Supreme Court will be binding on all courts in 
India. 

Is Supreme Court bound by its own decisions 7— The expression ‘all courts* 
in the territory of India cleatly means courts other than the Supreme Court. 
Thus the Supreme Court is not bound by its own decisions and may in proper 
cases reverse its previous decisions. 

Tbe question was considered in detail by the Supreme Court in the case 
of Bengal Immunity Co. v. State of Bihar. 1 2 In this case the Court held “there 
is nothing in the Indian Constitution which prevents the Supreme Court depart- 
ing from its previous decisions if it is convinced of its error and its beneficial 
effect on the general interest of the public.*’ The Court also laid down the 
guidelines for overruling its earlier decisions. The Court said, “The Supreme 
Court should not lightly dissent from its previous decision. Its power of 
review must be exercised with due care and caution and only for advancing the 
public well being in the light of surrounding circumstances of each case brought 
to its notice but it is not right to confine its power within rigidly fixed limits. 
If on a re-examination it comes to the conclusion that the previous majority 
decision was plainly erroneous then it will be its duty to say so and pot to 
perpetuate its mistake." 

The doctrine of stare decisis, the Court said, is not an inflexible rule of 
law and cannot be permitted to perpetuate errors of the Supreme Court to the 
detriment of the general welfare of the public. More so, the doctrine has 
hardly any application to an isolated and stray decision of the Court very 
recently made and not followed by a series of decisions based thereon. In this 
case the Court has reconsidered its previous decision given ia the case of 
United Motors v. State of Bombay .* 

In Golaknath v. State of Punjab , s tbe Supreme Court bad reversed two of 
its previous decisions, l. e., Shankar I Prasad’s case and Sajjan Singh's case. In 
both the cases, the court had held that the power to amend tbe Constitution 
was contained in Article 368 and the word Taw* in Article 13 did not include 
an amendment of the Constitution which is made in exercise of constituent 
power of Parliament. In Golaknath’s case, however, the Supreme Court revers- 
ed its decisions in the above cases and held that the power to amend the 
Fundamental Rights is not found in Article 368, but in the residuary power 
of Legislation, hence a law made under Article 368 is subject to Article 13. In 
that case \ht Couil had applied the rule of prospective overruling. 

The recent instance that the court is not bound by its previous decisions 
is furnished by the decision in the Fundamental Rights case(Kesavanand v. State 

1. A. I. R. 1955 S. C. 661. 

2. A. 1. R. 1953 S. C. 352. 

3 A. I. R. 1967 S.C. 1643. 



22 ) 


1UB UXlOS JUDICIARY 


27 1 


af Kerala). 1 In that case the Supreme Court reconsidered its decision in Golak- 
Nath's case and overruled it. The majority held that the Goiak Nath's case 
was wrongly decided and the word ’law' in Article 13 did not include an 
amendment of the Constitution passed under Article 368. 

Thus it is clear that the doctrine of Precedent {stare decisis) is followed 
in India to a limited extent. It is to be noted that this is in line with the 
modern practice. Till recently the House of Lords strictly adhered to the 
doctrine of Precedent. But in one of its recent decisions the House of Lords 
has held that it is not bound by its own decisions.’ The observation -of the 
House <a Lords is wvrrtb quoting here : 

“Their Lordships, nevertheless recognise that two rigid adherence to 
precedent may lead to injustice in a particular case also uaduly restrict 
(he proper development of law. They propose, therefore, to modify 
their present practice and, while treating former decisions of this House 
as normally binding, to depart from a previous decision when it appears 
right to do so." 

The Allahabad, 3 Bombaya 4 and Karnatak* High Courts have held that 
the obiter dicta of the Supreme Court is also 'law* within the meaning of Article 
141 and hence is binding on all courts. 

The judgement of the Supreme Court based on concession aad not on any 
analysis or examination of the televant provisions will not help as judicial 
precedents. So, if in a case it was conceded on behalf of the State that in the 
absence of a sanction the prosecution of the appellant must fad and hence 
there was no need to analyse the relevant provisions of law, it could not be 
cited as a judicial precedent. 3 

Power of Supreme Court to review its judgments.— Under Article 137 the 
Supreme Court has expressly been given the power to review its judgment. 
However, this is subject to any law passed by the Parliament. This power is 
exercisable under tulcs made by, the Court under Article 145, on grounds 
mentioned in Order 47, Rule 1 of C. P. C. A review will lie in the Supreme 
Court on : 

(1) discovery of new and important matters or evidence ; 

(2) mistake or error apparent on the face of the record ; and 

(3) any other sufficient reason. 7 

In R. D. Sagar v. V. Nagary* the Supreme Court has held that a judg- 
ment of the final court of the land is final. A review of such a judgment is an 
exceptional phenomenon, permitted only where a grave and glaring etiot ot 
other wcIJ-eslabJjibed ground is made out. Jn the present case, the petitioner 


A. I.R. 197J S.C 1461. 

Ju djcia I Commit tee of Privy Council in England and Supreme Court in U. S. A. See 
also Phanmdra Chandra v. The Kin*. A. I. R. l"40 P. C. 1 17- maw* Statement 
(Judicial Precedent) issued by the House of Lord* la (1966) 1 W. L K. 1-S4. 

Ram Surat v. Ram Mur an. A- t. R. 1955 Rom. 210. 


K. P. Doctor v. State o( Bombay. A. I. R. 195J Bom. 220. 

State South Central Railway, A. I. R. 1977 Kaot. 1(4. 

Laksfcmi Shafller v. Stale (Delhi Adnunulraitoo), A, I. R- 197) S. C. 451. 
Lolenath Tolaram v. B. N. RAngmant, AIR. 1915 S. C. 279. 


A. LR. 1976 S.C. 218 J. 



272 coNsurutioNAL law op india [Chap. 


sought the review of an earlier judgmeot on the ground that certain observa- 
tions in the judgment amounted almost branding him as unindicted criminal, 
that is, guilty of abetting forgery and perjury which were unmerited and should, 
therefore, be obliterated. The court declined to cancel the above observations. 
However, it modified its rigour by making certain observations. 

Article 38 empowers Parliament to invest the Supreme Court with such 
additional jurisdiction and powers with respect to any of the matters mentioned 
in the Union List as it thinks fit. 

Ancillary Powers of Supreme Court.— Under Article 140 Parliament may 
by law confer such supplementary power on the Supreme Court as made to 
appear to be necessary to enable it to perform effectively the functions placed 
upon it uader the Constitution. But such supplementary powers should not be 
inconsistent with any of tbe provisions of the Constitution. 

The decrees passed or order made by the Supreme Court shall be enforce- 
able throughout the territory of India. All authorities, civil and judicial, in 
the territory of India shall act in aid of the Supreme Court (Art. 144). 

Under Article 14S the Supreme Court has power, with the approval of the 
President, to make rules to regulate its own procedure. This is, however, subject 
to any law made by Parliament. As a result of tbe insertion of new Article 
139-A by tbe Constitution {42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 some consequential 
changes have been m ade in Art. 145 of the Constitution. 

INDEPENDENCE OF JUDICIARY-HOW MAINTAINED 
UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 7 

Only an impartial and independent judiciary can protect the rights of the 
individual and provide equal justice without fear or favour. It is, therefore, 
very necessary that the Supreme Court should be allowed to perform its func- 
tions in an atmosphere of independence and be free from all kinds of political 
pleasures, The Constitution has made several provisions to ensure indepen- 
dence of judiciary : 

(1) Security or tenure.— The Judges of the Supreme Court have security 
of tenure. They cannot be removed from office except by an order 
of the. President and that also only on the ground of proved mis- 
behavior or incapacity, supported by a resolution adopted by a 
majority of total membership of each House and also by a majority 
of not less than 2/3 of the members of the House present and 
voting. Parliament may, however, regulate the procedure for 
presentation of the address and for investigation and proof of ihe 
misbehaviour or incapacity of a judge. But Parliament cannot 
misuse this power, because the special procedure for their removal 
must be followed. 

(2) Salaries of Judges fixed, not subject lo vote of Legislature. — The 
salaries and allowances of the Judges of the Supreme Court are 
fixed by the Constitution and charged on the Consolidated Fund of 
India. They are not subject to vote of Legislature. During the 
term of their office, their salaries and allowances cannot be altered 
lo their disadvantage except in grave financial emergency. 

(3) Parliament can extend, but cannot curtail tbe jurisdiction and power 
of the Supreme Court.— In respect of its jurisdiction. Parliament 
may change pecuniary limit for appeals to tbe Supreme Court in 



22 ) 


f HB UMON JODICIAR* 


273 


civil cases, enhance the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court 
confer supplementary power to enable it to work more effectively’ 
confer power to issue directions, order or writs including all the 
prerogative writs for any -purpose other that- those mentioned in 
Article 132. The point to be ooted in all. these provisions is that 
the Parliament can exceed, but cannot curtail the jurisdiction and 
power of tbe Supreme Court. 

(4) No discussion in Legislature on the conduct of tbe Judges.— Neither 

in Parliament nor ia a Stale Legislature a discussion can take place 
with respect to the conduct of a Judge of the Supreme Court ia 
discharge of bis duties (Art. 21 1). 

(5) Power to Punish for its Contempt.— The Supreme Court and the 
High Courts have the power to punish any person for its contempt. 
(Art. 129 and 21Sj. This power is very essential for maintaining 
the impartiality and independence of the judiciary. 

(6) Separation of Judiciary from executive — Art. 50 directs the State 

to take steps to separate the judiciary from the executive in the 
public services of the State. It emphasises the Deed of securing the 
judiciary from the interference by the executive. 

(7) Judges of the Supreme Court ate appointed tiy the Exccutltc with 
the consultation of Legal Experts. — The Constitution does not leave 
the appointment of the Judges of the Supreme Court to the 
unguided descretion of the Executive. Tbe Executive is required to 
consult Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts in the 
appointment of the Judges of tbe Supreme Couit. Tbe indepen- 
dence of the High Court is emphasised by Art. 229 which 
provides that appointment of officers and servants shall be made 
by the Chief Justice or such other Judge or officer as he may 
appoint. 

Thus the position of the Supreme Court is very strong and its iodepen* 
dcncc is adequately guaranteed. However, the present practice of appointing 
retired judges in various capacities might pose a serious danger to judicial 
independence. The Law Commission has pointed out dangers of the prevailing 
practice ia (he following words: 

•‘It is clearly undesirable that the Supreme Court Judges should look 
forward to other Government employment after their retirement. 
The Government is a party in a large number of cases in the highest 
Court and the average citizens may well get the impression that a 
Judge, who might look forward to being employed by the Govern- 
ment after his retirement, does not bring to bear on bts work that 
detachment of outlook which is excepied of a Judge ta case in 
which Government is a party. Wc arc clearly of the view that the 
practice has a tendency to effect tbe independence of the judges and 
should be discontinued.”* 


1. Law Corazukuoa, XIV Report, p, C6. 

Cobs. 35 



23 

The State Executive 
(Arts. 153 to 167) 

Tbe Governor.— The pattern of Government in the State is the same as 
that for the Union, that is, a parliamentary system. The Executive Head is 
Constitutional Head, who is to act according to the advice of the Council of 
Ministers. The Constitution of India, by Article 153, creates the office of the 
Governor. Thus each State shall have a Governor. However, one person can 
be appointed Governor for two or more States. 1 The executive power of the 
State is vested in the Governor. He shall exercise the executive power either 
directly or through officers subordinate to him. 2 The expression “officers sub- 
ordinate to him" include ‘a Minister of tbe State’. 3 

Appointment of a Governor.— The Governor of a State is appointed by the 
President of India. 4 5 He is neither elected by the direct vote of the people nor 
by an indirect vote by a specially constituted Electoral College as is the case 
with the President. He is a nominee of the Central Government. 

Tbe office of Governor of a Slate is not an employment under the 
Government of India and it dots not, therefore, come within the prohibition 
of Cl. (d) or Art. 319.* 

Qualifications —According to Article 157 a person to be eligible to be 
appointed as Governor must be (a) citizen of India, and (b) must have com- 
pleted the age of 35 years. 

The Governor must not be a member of either House of Parliament 
or of a House of the Legislature of any Slate. If a member of either House of 
Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any such State is appointed as 
Governor, he shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in the House on the date 
on which he enters upon his office as Governor. He shall not hold any other 
office of profit l Art. 158). 

Tbe Governor is entitled to such emoluments, allowances and privileges 
as may be determined by Parliament by law. Tbe salary of the Governor at 
present is fixed at Rs. 5,500. He is also entitled to free use of his official 
residence. The salary and allowances of the Governor cannot be reduced 
during his term of office (Art. 158 (4) ). 

The Governor, before entering upon his office, is required to take an 
oath or affirmation in the presence of the Chief Justice of the High Court or if 
he is not present, in the presence of the senior most Judge of the High Couit. 

Tenure and Removal.— Article 156 o r the Constitution says that the 
Governor shall hold office, during the pleasure of tbe President. Subject to 

1. Art. 153 Proviso. 

2. Art. 134. 

3. Emperor v. Siboath Baotijee, A. 1 R. 1945 P. C. 101 

4. Art. 155. 

5. Hargoviod v. Raghakul, A. I. R. 1979 S. C. 1109. 



231 


THE STATE EXECUTIVE 


275 


this -rule, the tenure of the office of the Governor is fixed for five years from 
the date on which he enters upon his office. He may be removed from his 
office at any time by the President. The President acts on the advice of the 
Cabinet. The Governor may, however, resign his office by writing to the 
President. 

Discharge of his functions in certain contingencies.— Under Article 160 the 
President is authorised to make such provision as be thinks fit for the discharge 
of the functions of the Governor of a State. 

POWERS OF THE GOVERNOR 

“Shortly speaking, the powers of the Governor of a State are analogous 
to those of the President excepting that the Governor has no diplomatic, mili- 
tary or emergency power. The powers of the Governor can be classified under 
four heads : Executive, Financial, Legislative and Judicial.” 1 2 * 4 * &. * 

1. Executive power. — The executive power of the State is vested in the 
Governor and is to be exercised by him directly or through officers subordinate 
to him.’ - * Article 162 defines the extent of the executive power which extends 
to matters with respect to which the legislature of the State has power to make 
laws. All executive actions of the Government of a Slate shall be expressed 
to be taken in tbe name of the Governor. Orders and instruments, made and 
executed in the name of the Governor, shall be authenticated in the manner 
specified in the rules made by the Governor. The validity of an order of instru- 
ment which is so authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground 
that it was not made or executed by the Governor. 8 

The provisions of Article 166 (1) and (2) are, however, directory aod not 
mandatory. This means that even if an order is not expressed in the way 
mentioned in these provisions, it is not invalid. In such a case, it should be 
proved that it was made by the proper authority, under clause (3) of Ariicle 166. 
If Dot proved then the order can be challenged in the Court on grounds men- 
tioned in clause (2) of the Article. Authentication only signifies that the order 
is made b> the Governor but if in making the order the Governor has not acted 
according to law the order can be challenged.* 

Under Article 166 (3) the Governor is authorised to make rules for the 
more convenient transaction of the business of the Government of the State and 
for its allocation among Ministers.* 

The Supreme Court in Ram J away a Kapur v. Stale of Punjab,* held 
that our Constitution has adopted tbe British system of Parliamentary form of 
Government aoJ the basic principle of this type of Government is that the 
Presidio t andiGovernori are constitutional heads and the real executive powers 
3 re vested in the Council of Ministers. 

In Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab ,* tbe Supreme Court held that the 

1, Basil. D. D. : Commentary on tbe Constitution of l cubs. Vol- |l, p 233. 

2. Article 154. 

J. Article 166 U) UF 

4. Ankle lt6 (l)- 

3 B. L. Coll on Mill* v. State of W. B , A. I. R. 1^7 S. C. 114$. 

&. A.LR. 1955 S.C 549. 

T A I R- 1974 S.C 2»«. 



276 


CONSTITUTIONAL TAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


President and the Governors arc only constitutional herds and they exercise 
their powers and functions with the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers 
and not personally save in cases where the Governor is required by the Cons- 
titution to exercise his functions in his discretion. The Governor exercises 
bis discretion in harmony with his Council of Ministers. The appointment as 
well as removal of the members of the Subordinate Judicial Service is an execu- 
tive action of the Governor to be exercised on the aid and advice of the Council 
of Ministers in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. That way 
any action by any servant of the Union or the State in regard to appointment 
or dismissal is brought against the Union or the Stale and not against the Presi- 
dent or the Governor. Wherever the Constitution requires the ‘satisfaction* 
of the President or the Governor, the satisfaction is not the personal satisfac- 
tion of the President or the Governor but in the constitutional sense of the 
cabinet system of Government it is the satisfaction of the Council of Ministers. 
The Court was disposing of appeals filed by two probationer judicial officers 
of Punjab whose services were terminated by concerned Ministers without 
making any reference to the Governor. The appellants contended that removal 
is a personal power of the Governor and is incapable of being delegated 
to concerned Minister or Chief Minister. They relied on the decision in 
Sardarl Lai v. Union of India, 1 in which it was held that where the President or 
the Governor, if satisfied, make an order under Art. 311 (2) proviso (c) the 
satisfaction of the President or Governor is his peisonal satisfaction. 

The Court rejected their contentions and overruled the judgment delivered 
in Sardarl Lai's case. The Court said, “A Govcruor can allocate the business 
of the Government to the Ministers and such allocation is no delegation, and it 
is an exercise of executive powers by the Governor through the Council of 
Ministers or officers under the rule of business,” The appellant’s contention 
that termination orders were passed by the Chief Minister or concerned Minister 
without the formal approval of the Governor is therefore untenable. The deci- 
sion of aoy Minister or Officer under rules of business made under any of the 
Arts. 77 (3) and 166 (3) is the decision of the President or the Governor, 
respectively These Articles do not provide for any delegation. Therefore, 
the decision of Minister or officer is the decision of the President or the 
Governor. 

Tracing the historical background of the Indian Constitution and citing 
opinions of judicial authorities and previous decisions of the Supreme Court the 
Judges said, “our Constitution embodies generally the Parliamentary or the 
cabinet system of Government on the British model, both for the Union and the 
States”. It is fundamental principle o f English coostitutional law that Minister 
must accept responsibility for every executive act. In England the sovereign 
never acts on his own responsibility, the power of the sovereign is conditional 
by the practical rule that the Crown must find advisers to bear responsibility for 
his action. Those advisors must have the confidence of the House of Commoos. 
This rule of English constitutional law is incorporated in our Constitution. 

Tbe Indian Constitution envisages a paiiiamtirt&ry and responsible form 
of Government at the Centre and in the States and not a Presidential form of 
Government. The powers of the Governor and the constitutional head arc not 
different than that of the President at the Centre. 

2. Financial powers —A money Bill cannot be introduced in the Legis- 
lative Assembly of the State without the recommendation of the Governor. No 

I. Ain. 1971 S. C. IS1V. 



23] 


THE STATU EXECUTIVE 


277 


SsSSSSSs2SS“ 

3. l>«h^ t P , ?^^ , i?SS r at , S , SS ! and "ace as ha tb.pt. 
House or the Legislature of the Stale to j( jW onc session 

fit. However, sis months must no. lapse oetw ^ House M tithcr House 
and the first in the oest se»ton. He t JP h J! address ,j e state Legis- 

and dissolve the Usislative As«moty ootilie asscDl orthe P , es ,dent. He has 

Stw reserve certain ^fifis fo, the assent of the President * He nominates 1/6 
or the membersof the Legislative Councn. ^ 

The most important power is similar to that or the Prest- 

making power. Hi. to U^atore is no. in session and if the 

dent. Under Article 213, “ he SUmnc2 esist which require him to take 
Governor is satisfied that et cumstan Dc(s However, the Governor 

immediate action he Sous instructions from the President m 

cannot issue an Ordmacce w itboul ^ his p , t vrous sanction or (b) 

cases in '“ h i th W S'lnTr IbeCoSsffion tor the assent or the President, 
required to he reserved under the Cons. ^ rf ^ ^ LegillaluIe 

Every Ordinance is “ sU >veets [r o m the re assembly of the 

and shall cease to operate at the «pi y lulion disapproving it is passed by 

Legislature or earlier than ««JgJ^} oor roay withdraw the Ordinance at any 
the Legislative Assembly, inc # 

Act of the Legislature. says that the Governor shall have 

4. The Pardoning ^ P. gah , b 0, ' nt or 

the Powers to graoLPH^SSS-J ! P SienSofjmy person convicted of any 
to suspend, remit or commute the ““ cfrl ^b ich t he executive power of the 
offence against any ' '“J the Slate calends to matters w.lh respect 
“SfiKS-uISSS of .h' State ha, power to make laws. ^ 



1. Article 203 (*)• 

2. Article 202. 

3. Article n*<U «*•*#>• 

4. Article 200. 

5. Article IT I* 

6 Article 213. 



278 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA (Chap, 


A pardon is an act of grace, and therefore, it cannot be demanded as a 
matter of right. The effect of pardon is that it not only removes that punish- 
ment but in the eye oflaw places the offender in the same position as if he had 
never committed the offence. 

The executive can exercise the pardoning power at any time after com- 
mission of an offence, either before legal proceedings are taken or during their' 
pendency or either before or after conviction. 1 2 3 

K. M- Nanatali v. State of Bombay , s the petitioner was convicted of 
murder and was sentenced to imprisonment for life by the Bombay High Court. 
At the time of the decision of the High Court the petitioner was in naval 
custody. Soon after the judgment was pronounced by the High Court the 
petitioner made an application for leave to appeal to Supreme Court. On the 
same day the Governor issued an order under Article 161 suspending the 
sentence subject to this that the accused shall remain in the Naval Jail Custody 
till the disposal of his appeal by the Supreme Couit. The warrant issued for 
the arrest of the accused was returned unserved. 

The question involved was : Should the accused surrender to his sentence 
as required by Rules of the Supreme Court under O. 21, R. 5 or should remain 
in naval custody in pursuant to the order made by the Governor under 
Article 161. 

The Court held that power to suspend a sentence by the Governor under 
Article 161 is subject to the rules made by the Supreme Court with respect 
to cases which are pending before it in appeal. The power of Governor to 
suspend the sentence of a convict was bad in so much as it came in conflict 
with the rule of the Supreme Court which required the petitioner to surrender 
himself to his scnlence. It is open to the Governor to grant a full pardon at 
any time even during the pendency of the case in the Supreme Court in exercise 
of what is ordinarily called mercy jurisdiction. But the Governor cannot 
exercise bis power of suspension of the sentence for the period when the 
Supreme Court is seized of the case. The order of the Governor could only 
operate until the matter became sub judice in the Supreme Court and it did 
become so on the filing of the petition for special leave to appeal. After the 
filing of such a petition and till the judicial process is over the power of the 
Governor cannot be exercised. 

The Council of Ministers.— Article 163 (1) says that there shall be a 
Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister as the head to ‘aid and ad\ise’ the 
Governor in exercise of his functions. The Council of Ministers in the States is 
constituted and functions in the same way as the Union Cabinet. > 

The Chief Minister is appointed by the Governor. 8 As a matter of a 
well-established convention, it is the leader of the Legislative Assembly who 
should be appointed as the Chief Minister. Thus in normal circumstance the 
choice of the Governor is limited to the leader of the majority party. But 
there may be circumstances where the Governor would have to exercise his 
discretion in selecting the Chief Minister. The other Ministers are appointed 
by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister. In the appointment of 
other Ministers the Chief Minister has the final say because it is the Chief 

1. In re Channugadu, A. I. R. 1954 Mad. 911 at p. 917. 

2. A. I. R. 1961 S. C. 112. 

3. Article 164. 



23) 


TUB STATE BXECUUVE 


219 


Minister who has to run the Government. This is, indeed, necessary in order 
to ensure the successful operation of the rule of collective responsibility. 

The Governor may appoint a person as a Chief Minister or a Minister 
who is not a member of either House of the State Legislature. But he must be 
elected to the Houses of State Legislature within ibe period of six months. If 
he does not become member of tbs Legislature within six months of his 
appointment as the Chief Minister or Minister he will cease to be Chief Minister 
or Minister. 1 * 3 Before a Minister enters upon his office the Governor is to 
administer to him the prescribed oath of office and secrecy. 

According to Article 164 (1) the Ministers shall hold office during the 
pleasure of the Governor. But this pleasure is to be exercisable by the 
Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister. This follows from clause (2) 
of Article 1 14 which says that the Council of Ministers shall be collectively 
responsible to the Legislative Assembly of the State. So long as the ministry 
commands the confidence of the Lower House of a Stale Legislature the 
Governor is bound to. accept the advice of the Chief Minister. Indeed, it 
would be strange that a Minister who is responsible for its acts and policies 
to the legislature can be dismissed by the Governor. This means that a Minis* 
ler bolds office during the pleasure of the Chief Minister. The Governor is 
bound to dismiss a Minister as and when advised by tho Chief Minister. It 
is only then that the smooth functioning of the principle of collective respon- 
sibility can be maintained. 9 

Under Article 167 (a) it is the duty of Chief Minister of State to commu- 
nicate all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration 
of the State and proposal for legislation. If the Governor asks him to furnish 
such information it is the duty of the Chief Minister to do so. The Chief 
Minister, if required by the Governor, will also submit for consideration of 
the Cabinet any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister 
which has not been considered by the Cabinet.* 

It is to be noted that Article 167 (c) further strengthens the rule of collec- 
tive responsibility and gives power to the Chief Minister to review the decision 
taken by any Minister individually. When a decision is taken by any Minister 
without reference to the Cabinet, the Governor ma> require it to be considered 
by the Cabinet. However, the Governor cannot override decision of a Minister. 
If the Cabinet stands behind him the Minister remains and the Governor is 
bound to accept his decision. If, however, the cabinet does not uphold bis 
decision he will have to quit the ministry. If he insists to remain he will be 
dismissed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister. It is a 
safeguard which ensures the working of the principle of the collective 
responsibility and the powers of the Chief Minister and not a power which 
interferes with the Governor. 

Relationship between the Governor and Co unci J of Ministers. — Jn general, 
the relation between the Governor and his Ministers is the same as that bet- 
ween the President and his Ministers, with this important difference that while 
the Constitution docs not empower the President to exercise any function ‘in 
his discretion* it authorises the Governor to exercise some functions in his 
discretion.’ 

1. Article 164 (4). 1 

J5. Article 167 <»>. 

3. Article 167 (c) 



280 


CO.-SUIUUONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


Article 163 says that there shall be Council of Ministers with the Chief 
Minister as the head to aid and advice the Governor in the exercise of his 
functions, except in so far as he is by or under this Constitution required to 
exercise his functions or any of them in his discretion. 

In exercise of discretionary powers the Governor is not required to act 
on the advice of his Ministers or even to seek such advice. This is made clear 
from clause (2) of this Article which says that if any question arises whether 
any matter is or is not a matter as regards whi:h the Governor is required 
by the Constitution to act in his discretion, the decision of the Governor shall 
be final, and the validity of anything done by the Governor shall not be called 
into question on the ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in his 
discretion. 

The Constitution does not define as to what are the discretionary powers 
of the Governor. This raises a question whether the Governor, like the 
President, is merely a constitutional bead who is to exercise his powers in 
accordance with the advice of his Ministers responsible to the Lower House or 
whether he has some real power. It is to be noted that the language of 
Aiticle 163 is a partial reproduction of section 50 (1) of the Government of 
India Act, 1935. Indeed, the discretionary powers of the Governor seemed 
alarming to the Members of the Constituent Assembly. They before them 
had, in fact, the image of imperialist authority and repository or arbitrary 
authority under the Government of India Act, 1935. Hence, they grew 
suspicious of the Governor’s role even under the new Constitution when they 
found the same language of 1935 Act, being repeated, through its Articles. 
Their suspicion, however, was unfounded in view of the Parliamentary form of 
Government adopted in the Constitution. When a Cabinet collectively respon- 
sible to the legislature is to give advice to the Governor in the discharge of his 
functions, occasions are almost non-existent for him to act contrary to their 
advice. In the case of Sunil Kumar v. Government of West Bengal, 1 the 
Calcutta High Court observed : 

"The Governor under the present Constitution cannot act except in 
accordance with advice of his Ministers. Under the Government 

of India Act, 1935, the position was different.. Under the 

present Constitution, the power to act in bis discretion or in his 
individual capacity has been taken away and the Governor, there- 
fore, must act on the advice of his Minister " 

The Governor can act in his discretion only in matters in which he is 
expressly required by or under the Constitution to do so. 

The only case in which the Governor is expressly required to exercise his 
functions under the Constitution in bis discretion are paras, 9 and 18 of the 
6th Schedule to the Constitution, regarding the administration of tribal areas 
in Assam. Noimally, thus, he will act only as constitutional head in accord- 
ance with the advice of the Council of Ministers. But in times of crisis the 
Governor can effectively and constitutionally utilize this provision and act in 
his discretion particularly in cases where there might be conflict between the 
Governor and the Council of Ministers on any issue. In view of the responsi- 
bility of the Governor to the President and of the fact that the Governor’s 
decision as to whether he should act in his discretion in any particular matter 
is final, it would be possible for the Governor to act without ministerial advice 


1. A.I.R. 1950 Cal. 274. 


23} tllfl srAlB ExecunVB 281 

m certain other matters according to the circumstances, cveo though they are 
not specifically mentioned in the Constitution as discretionary funcuoas. 

The following are the circumstances where the Governor will be called 
upon to exercise his discretion : (t) appointment of the Chief Minister, (2) the 
dismissal of a Ministry, l3) the dissolution of the Legislative Assembly, (4) 
advising the President for the proclamation of an emergency under Article 356 
of the Constitution. 

(i) Appointment of the Chief Minister.— The Chief Minister is appointed 
by the Governor.* As a matter of a well-established convention the leader 
of the majority party in the Lower House should be appointed as' the Chief 
Minister. In normal circumstances the Governor need have no doubt as to 
who is the leader of the majority party in the Lower House. But circumstances 
may arise when it may be doubtful as to who is the proper person, /. e. leader 
of the majority party in the House. There is no dearth of examples in India. 
In fact this had happened in many States after the third General Election, 
when there was no recognised leader in the House or either parties claiming 
majority without having such majority. la such circumstances the 
Governor may have to exercise his discretion in selecting the Chief Minister. 
After the Fourth General Election in 1967 the power of the Governor to 
appoint a Chief Minister became a matter of controversy. 

In the State of Rajasthan no party could get majority in the Legislature. 
The Congress was a single largest patty in the Assembly having 88 members. 
Against this, there was a coalition of non-congrcss parties. It had 80 members 
in the Assembly. There were 15 independents. Both the groups claimed the 
support of the independents and they asked the Governor to invite their leader 
to form the Government. 

The members of the coalition group even paraded before the Governor 
and the President to prove their majority. But the Governor excluded the 
independents for the purpose of ascertaining the majority and invited the 
leader of the largest single party to form the Government. The coalition 
criticised the action of the Governor. According to them the action of the 
Governor was politically motivated and it was done in order to install the 
Congress ministry. In support of his action the Governor cited an old prece- 
dent. In 1952 Sri Prakash, the Governor of Madras, had invited the leader of 
the single largest party to form the Government. But this precedent had not 
been followed consistently by the Governors in different States. In 1965 though 
the Communist party was the largest single party in Kerala yet it was not 
invited to form the Government. 

In view of the above , it is advisable that leader of the largest single party 
should first be invited to form the Government. Such a convention, accord- 
ing to Dr. M. P. Jain, will make the Governor’s task of appointing, the Chief 
Minister, by and targe, non-political and non-controversiai. 3 Mr. S. N. Misra, 
while agreeing with the above rule, accepts one exception to the above 
suggestion. According to him “if some political parties form a united front 
before the election, the leader of the united front, if its combined strength 
forms the largest group in the House, should be called to form the Govern- 
ment”. Regarding a coalition formed after the election he says that there 
seems no difficulty as to why the leader of such a coalition be not invited to 
form the Government but in such a situation the Governor himself has to 

1. Article 164. 

2. Jain M.P.— Indian Constitutional Law. 2nd edition, 1970. p 220. 

Const 36 



282 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Chap. 


take the responsibility of assessing the situation, particularly when the strength 
of the largest single party in the House happens to be very dose to the coali- 
tion and such party does not enter into any coalition. To say that the Governor 
is not constitutionally bound to assess the situation, while making the appoint- 
ment of Chief Minister does not appear to be correct. The Governor is the 
custodian of the Constitution. As such it is his sacred duty to appoint that 
person as Chief Minister who is in a position to carry the House with 
him ; a duty which can properly be discharged only after assessment 
of the situation. Of course, there are no express provisions in the Constitution 
requiring the Governor to make an assessment of the situation, but for practical 
reasons it is very difficult to appoint a person as Chief Minister without 
ascertaining that such a person commands the support of the majority of 
the members of the House. It is a fact that the consideration of which cannot 
be ignored by any Governor. 1 2 3 4 

In H. S. Verma v. T. N. Singh , a the appellant challenged the validity of 
appointment of Mr. T.N. Singh, as Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, on the 
ground that be was not a member of either House of the Legislature at the 
time of his appointment. The Supreme Court held that the appointment 
cannot be challenged on the above ground. The Court said that Clause (4) 
of Art. 164 must be interpreted in the context of Arts. 163 aod 164 of the 
Consiitution. Article 163 (1) provides that there shall be a Council of Ministers 
with ibe Chief Minister at the bead to aid and advise the Governor in exercise 
of his functions, except in so far as he is by or under this Constitution required 
to cxetcise his functions or any of them in his discretion. Under clause (1) of 
Article 164 the Chief Minister has to be appointed by the Governor and the 
other Ministers have to be appointed by hitn on the advice of the Chief Minis- 
ter. They all hold office during the pleasure of the Governor. Clause (1) 
does not provide any qualification for the person to be selected by the 
Governor as the Chief Minister or Minister, but (2) makes h essential that the 
Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative Assem- 
bly of the State. This is the only condition that the Constitution prescribes in 
this behalf. Also, he need not be a member of the Upper House. A member 
or the Upper House may also be appointed as a Chier Minister, for example, 
C. Rajagopalachari in Madras and Morarji Desai in Bombay in 1952, C. B. 
Gupta in Uttar Pradesh in 1960 and Mandal in Bihar in 1 )68 were appointed 
as Chief Ministers of their respective States and they were all members of Upper 
House of the State Legislature. 

Further, it is not necessary that the Chief Minister or a Minister shall 
always be a member of the Legislative Assembly. A non-member may also 
be appointed a Chief Minister or a Minister. Mr. C. B. Gupta was appointed 
as Chief Minister in Uttar Pradesh in 1960 without being member of either 
Houses of the State Legislature. The Allahabad High Court upheld the 
constitutionality of his appointment.® but he must be in a position to com- 
mand the support of the majority of tbe members of the Legislature. 

Ministers — Public Servants. — In M. Karunanidhi v. Union of India 1 the 
question raised before the Supreme Court was whether the Chief Minister 


1. Misra. S.N.— The ■•Governor, under ibe Constitution of India”, Allahabad University 
Studies. 1971. 

2. A.I.R. 1971 S.C. 1331. 

3. Har Sbaian v. Chandra Bban, A.I.R. 1962 All. 301. 

4. A.I.R. 1979 S. C. 899. 



■231 


THB STATE EXECUTIVE 


283 


or a Minister are a public servant within the meaning of section 21 (12) of 
the Indian Penal Code. 

Thf Court held that the first part of section 21 (12) I. P. C. signifies a 
, . . . r i. r anc i cgfvant and not applicable to a Chief Minister, 

relationship of master ana ^rvam nno ™' .!£ th of lhe Government" 

““oram“eh°widS amplitude » as to include within its ambit to even public 
ervant Tho miy not be a regular employee receiving salary from hu master. 
A Chief Minister or a Minister are m the f >ay or the Got /ernmi enl :^i ml 
therefore, public servants within the meaning of section 21 (12) of the 1. P. C. 

Article 164 and 167 of the Constitution makes it clear. Art. 164 says that 
Ministers are appointed or dismissed by the Governor and therefore they 
are subordinate to him. They get salary for the public work or public duty 
performed by them. Their salary is paid from tbc Government funds. 

(2) Dismissal of a ministry.— According to Article 164 the Ministers shall 
hold office during the pleasure of the Governor. This does not mean that 
the Governor can dismiss his ministers at any time at his sweet will. The 
exoression ‘during the pleasure’ under a Parliamentary form of Government 
me ins the confidence of the majority in the Legislature. He is to exercise his 
nlcasure in accordance with the advice of the Council of Ministers. This follows 
EX nrovhion in Article 164 (2) which makes the Council of Ministers 
collectively responsible to the Legislative Assembly of the State. This means 
thit till a ministry enjoys the confidence of the majority in the Lower House, 
hfcove^ dismiss it. This convention had been followed in 

EnguSd Sout any exception. In India, however, this convention has not 
been uniformly followed by the Governors. 

In West Bengal the Governor dismissed the Ajoy Mukherjee’s ministry in 

ssir^sssi. 

Ministers on me J. ich . be extraneous to the proceedings in 

if such informaliou ot raatet al J >m00j jBfora3 , ion he is salisfied lhal 
tbc Assembly . “ h ' ,*, t the support or the Majonly of tbc House, 

•to C T^iutUfirf re5e,ciiiug h s diserVtionary powers and dismiss the 
he would be justllied to eserasing upheld by tbe Calcutta High 

Tb. Court said that Article 
Court in Mahabir Prasaa . ^ to con dilion upon the powers of the 

164 (1) docs not impos y Min 5 ster a nd to dismiss^ ministry. This is 

Governor to “PP 01 " 1 discretion of the Governor. The right of the Gover- 
a matter entirely in the di . . w hj c h the Ministers hold office, is 

nor to withdraw the pj< cas w ... interpreting the provisions of the Indian 
absolute “ d ““ te SSThearily^ "reErfSr * Nieerian precedent,. which was 
Constitution the Court he y provisions in ihc Nigerian Constitution 
neither necessary nor ^ desiraWe. Theprov^ ^ ^ quite different and 
as well as the cir ^ u ” s . l f n th Provisions in the Indian Constitution and the 
cannot be compared with the pr lbere f orc , submitted that the Nigerian 

circumstances Piaffing -““g ia interpreting the provisions of the Ind.an 
precedent is not ai 

-—mined that the Governor, view was .or coerce.. His aeriou 
AlhSi lues*™ >■ 1 * 3 AC “*■ 



284 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA {CbaP- 

had also been criticised by constitutional jurists. According to a well-establish- 
ed convention if a ministry enjoys the confidence of majority in the House 
it shoud not be dismissed. Now the important question which arises as to 
how it can be tested that a ministry has confidence of the majority in the 
House. This is again a matter which is based on a well-established convention. 
The majority of the ministry can only be decided on the floor of the House. 
A ministry is to seek vote of confidence in the House. If a no-confidence 
motion is passed against a ministry this is a clear proof that the ministry has 
lost the confidence of the majority in the House. The majority of the minis- 
try cannot be judged on the basis of information or material extraneous to 
the proceedings in the Assembly. — , 

The Governor should have waited till the ministry had been voted out 
of the office by the House itself. In Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh the 
Governors have followed this practice and when doubts were raised about the 
majority of the ministiy in these States they did take notice of the extraneous 
materials and waited until a vote of no-confidence was passed against the 
ministry in the House. On the other hand, the Governor of West Bengal 
dismissed the Mukherjce's ministry on the extraneous information that it has 
lost its majority in the Legislative Assembly and the Chief Minister was not 
ready to summon the Assembly on an earlier date as suggested by him. Thus 
we sec (bat the Governors have acted differently in different States, more so 
in similar circumstances. His exercise of discretionary powers in the present 
case was clearly a flagrant violation of the constitutional conventions. 

The next important constitutional controversy arose in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh in 1970. The Governor dismissed the Charan Singh’s ministry and 
recommended for the imposition of President Rule m the State, as no party 
was in his opinion able to form a stable Government. In support of bis 
action the Governor has propounded a new philosophy relating to the func- 
tioning of the coalition Governments. In other words, in his opinion, the 
Chief Minister or a coalition Government cannot be treated at a par with 
the Chief Minister of a single party majority Government in the matter of 
removal of ministers or reconstitution of Council of Ministers, which involves 
a fundamental change in the complexion of the Government, On such occa- 
sions, according to him, the Chief Minister should first resign then reconstitute 
the Government. 

There is considerable merit in the Governor’s argument particularly in 
view of the Indian experience of coalition Governments. But this new philoso- 
phy has yet to crystallise and it needs to be properly evolved and more precisely 
defined so that it can be adopted as a constitutional practice. 

Regarding the question, whether the Chief Minister had lost the confi- 
dence of the Legislature, the Governor argued that after the withdrawal of 
the support by the coalition partner the Charan Singh Ministry was reduced 
to a minority. So far as the question of majority is concerned it does not 
make any difference whether the coalition paitner withdrew its support or the 
majority patty Government is reduced to minority by a large scale 
defections. The loss of majority of the Chief Minister by reason of the dissolu- 
tion of the coalition should not be equated by the Governor with the loss 
of support of confidence of a majority in the House. This is a question which 
was only to be decided in the House. The Congress (R) Government at the 
Centre headed by Smt. Indira Gandhi was admittedly a minority Government 
after the split in the Congress party. But it enjoyed the support of the 
majority in the Parliament with the support of the Communist party 
In Punjab, wheq tfi? coalition paitner the Jan Sangh withdrew its 



2J] 


THE SI AID EXECUTIVE 


285 


support Ihe Badal Ministry was reduced to a minority, but it proved its 
majority in the House with the support of the Congress (R). In the case of 
Uttar Pradesh soon after the Congress withdrew its support, other parties 
extended their support to the Charaa Singh's Ministry in the House. If there 
was nothing unconstitutional about what happened in the Punjab, surely the 
heavens would not have fallen if Cbarao Singh’s strength was allowed to be 
decided by the Assembly. This case can also not be equated with the West 
Bengal case. In West Bengal the Chief Minister was unwilling to face the 
Legislative Assembly at an early date to have its majority tested. In Uttar 
Pradesh, on the other hand, the Chief Minister had already summoned the 
Assembly io meet on October 6, 3970 and was also-ready to further advance 
the date if Governor so desired. But tbc Governor did not care to wait till 
the fate of the ministry was decided in the House and dismissed it. 

The Governor has certainly treaded on the domain of the Legislature in 
coming to his subjective judgment that the Charan Singh’s Ministry bad lost 
the confidence of the majority without its strength being actually tested on the 
floor of the House. To have dissolved the ministry through a Presidential 
proclamation amounted to by passing the Legislature to which alone the 
ministry was collectively responsible, Th it this should have been done when 
the State Legislative Assembly had been convened to meet within the next 
four days naturally shocked the conscience of many as a grave impropriety 
and as having no parallel or precedence whatsoever.* 

'After the constitutional crisis in Uttar Pradesh, the President appointed 
‘a Committee of Governors’ to study and formulate norms on the role of 
Governors under the Constitution. The recommendations of the Committee 
are as follows : 

(1) “A Governor has the right to dismiss a ministry if the Chief 
Minister shirks his primary responsibility of facing the Assembly within the 
shortest time to test the confidence of the Legislature in him.” 

(2) The test of confidence in the ministry should normally be left to a 
vote in the Assembly. A Chief Minister’s refusal to test his strength on the floor 
of Assembly can well be interpreted as a prima facie proof of his no longer 
enjoying the confidence of the Legislature. 

(3) If an alternative ministry can be formed which in the Governor’s 
view can command a majority in the Assembly, he must dismiss the ministry in 
power and install an alternative ministry in office. 

(4) If formation of such a ministry is not possible the Governor will 
be left with no alternative but to make a report to the President under Article 
356 and to recommend at the same time the dissolution of the Assembly. 

(5) The Chief Minister in a coalition, the Committee feels, deprives his 
pre-eminence solely from the agreement among the partner. When the Chief 
Minister heads a single party Government, his pre-eminence is unquestioned. 

A Chief Minister is the key-stone of the arch of the cabinet but this can apply 
only when he heads a team which collectively has a majority support m tbe 
Legislature. Thus the Chief Minister in a coalition cannot claim the right of 
advising the Governor with matter of appointment or dismissal of Ministers, 
in such a manner as to break the arch yet claim the right to continue as 
Chief Minister. 

i. Northern India Patrika, October S, 1970. 



286 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA (Chap. 


(6) On the Governor’s discretion, the Committee observes that right 
from the commencement of the Constitution, it has been recognised that in 
the choice of the Chief Minister, the Governor's decision under Article J 61 
(1) is final and based entirely on his unfettered judgment. 

(7) Regarding political defections the Committee feels that though 
there is a demand for legislation banning defections, such legislation would 
offend the provisions of Ailicles 19 (l) (c), 102 and 191 of the Constitution 
and would interfere with the right of dissent.’ 

la view of the circumstances it is submitted that constitutional conventions 
governing the exercise of discretionary powers of the Governor in India may be 
allowed to develop. It is also suggested that till such conventions are evolved 
and developed for guidance, the discretionary powers oftbe Governor should 
be codified and clearly laid down in the Constitution by necessary amendments. 

3 Dissolution of tbe Legislative Assembly.— According to Article 174 
the Governor summons, prorogues and dissolves the Legislative Assembly. In 
normal circumstances the Legislative Assembly is not dissolved by the Gover- 
nor, till the expiry of its normal tenure of five years. Out where Ministry 
has lost the majority and no alternative stable Ministry is possible he may 
dissolve tbe House. Is the Governor bound to accept the advice of the defeated 
ministry to dissolve the House ? In this case he can act according to his 
discretion. He may or may not dissolve the House. One view is that he is 
always bound to accept the advice of the defeated Chief Minister and dissolve 
the House. 

The other view is that he may not dissolve the House and try to find out 
a person who may form an alternate State Ministry. There are many examples 
where tbe Governors have refused to accept the advice given by the defeated 
Chief Minister to dissolve the House. In 1953 in Travancore Cochin a defeated 
Minister advised the Governor to dissolve tbe Assembly, but the Governor 
refused to accept Us advice. Thus it is cleat that in these circumstances the 
Governor can dissolve the Legislative Assembly in his discretion. 

4. Advising the President for the proclamation of an emergency under 
Article 356 of the Constitution. — Under Article 356 the Governor is to report to 
the President that a situation has arisen in which the Government of the State 
cannot be carried out in accordance with tbe provisions of the Constitution. 
Such a report may sometimes be against a Ministry in power, for example, if 
it attempts lo misuse its power to subvert the Constitution. It is clear that in 
such cases the report connot be made aicordiog to ministerial advice. More- 
over no such advice will be available where a ministry has resigned and an- 
other alternative ministry cannot be formed. 

Thus in making report to the President under Article 356 the Governor 
exercises his discretion. 


I. Northern India Palnka, November 27, 1971. 



24 

The State Legislature 
(Arts. 16S to 2X2) 

State Legislature.— Tbe Constitution provides for a Legislature for every 
State in the Union. The Legislature of every State consists of the Governor 
and House or Houses. The Legislatures in the State are either bicameral (con- 
sisting of two Houses) or unicameral (consisting of one House). The Legislature 
in Andhra Pradesh, Dihar, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, 
Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh, is bicameral. In the remaining States the 
Legislature is unicameral consisting of only one House, i. e. the Legislative 
Assembly. 1 

Creation and Abolition of Legislate Councils. - Under Article 169 Parlia- 
ment may by law provide for the abolition of the Legislative Council in a State 
where it already exists and also for the creation of such a Council in a State. 
Where such a Council docs not exist, if the Legislative Assembly of the State 
nasses a resolution to that effect by a majority of the total membership of the 
Assembly and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of the 
Assembly present and voting. No such law-making provision for the creation 
and abolition of the Legislative Council shall be deemed to be an amendment 
of the Constitution and, thererore, it can be passed like an ordinary piece of 
legislation. 3 

COMPOSITION OF THE HOUSES 

(i> Legislative Assembly (Vidfaan Sabba).-Tbe Legislative Assembly in 
a State is popular House. The minimum number of seats of the Legislative 
Assembly is fixed at 6Q_and the maximum number is fixe d at 500. The members 
of Legislative Assembly arc chosen directly by the people on the basis of adult 
franchise from territorial constilucncics in the State. 3 The representation in the 
Houses is on basis of population in respect of each territorial constituency in 
the State The 'population' is to be ascertained at the last preceding census. 
After the completion of exact census, the number of seats m Legislative 
Assembly of each State and the division of each State into territonal constituen- 
cies is to be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as Parliament by 
law determine. 

The Constitution ( 42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 has amended Art. 170 and 
added a new Explanation. According to this explanation, the number of seats 
fn Sate Assemblies will now be deteem.ned oo the basts of the 1971 census 
in state as the 2 000. The re-dctcrmmation of the consti- 

and will j 5 . eac h census, will take effect hereafter on dates fixed 

taXMS Thu, persons becoming eligible as voters a, a result of census 
b, the President. P u ^ d ived of exercising then right to send Ibeir 

undertaken in futu 2000. The President may by order specify that 

allocation of'seats in the Legislative Assembly may be readied on the basis of 

census taken after the year 2000 * 

1. Article 168. 

2. Article 168 (b). 

3. Article 170 (1), (2). . 

4. Article 170, Explanation ana Cl. U)- 



288 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


In the Legislative Assembly of every State, seats will be reserved for the 
Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes on the basis of population. 1 2 3 4 5 And also, 
if the Governor of a State is of opinion that the Anglo-Indian community is 
not adequately represented in the Legislative Assembly be may nominate such 
member of the community to the Assembly as he considers appropriate.* 
Originally all such reservation of the seats for the Scheduled Castes, the Sche- 
duled Tribes and the representative of the ^nglo-lndian community were to 
cease after ten years from the commencement of the Constitution. The 
Constitution (8th Amendment) Act, 1959, extended all such reservations, 
nominations for another ten years. Thus all such reservations was for 20 years 
and was to cease to have effect on the expiry of 2d years from the commence- 
ment or the Constiuiion.® The Constitution (23rd Amendment) Act, 1969, 
has further extended this period from 20 years to 30 years. 

Its Tenure.— The normal tenure of the Legislative Assembly of every 
State is of five-years but it may be dissolved earlier by the Governor.* During 
the proclamation of emergency the life of the Assembly may be extended by 
an Act of Parliament for a period of one year at a lime, but in no case beyond 
a period of six months after the proclamation has ceased to operate.® 

(ii) Legislative Council (Vidhan Parish ad). — The total number of members 
in the Legislative Council of a State having such a Council shall not exceed 
one-third of the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly of that 
State. But the total number of members in the Legislative Council of a State 
shall in no case be less than 40. 

Parliament may by law provide for the composition of the Legislative 
Council. Until Parliament passes such a law, the composition of the Legisla- 
tive Council shall be as fallows 

Of the total number of members in the Legislative Council of a State — 

(a) 1/3 are to be elected by electorates consisting of members of Muni- 
cipalities, District Boards and other local authorities ia the State as Parliament 
by law specify, 

(b) 1/2 are to be elected by electorates consisting of graduates of three 
years* standing residing in the State, 

(c) 1/2 arc to be elected by electorates consisting of persons who have 
been teaching for at least three years in educational institutions not lower in 
standard than secondary school. 

(d) 1/3 are to be elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly 
of the State from amongst persons who are not members of the Assembly. 

(e) the remainder /. e. 1/6 are to be nominated by the Governor from 
persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of such 
matters as Literature, Science, Art. Co-operative movement and social service. 

Its Tenure. — The Legislative Council is not subject to dissolution but 
after every two years 1/3 of its members retire. Like the Rajya Sabha in the 
Centre it is a permanent body. 

1. Article 332. 

2. Article 333. 

3. Article 334. 

4. Article 172. 

5. Ibid 



24J 


TUB STATE LEGlSLAI UKB 


239 


» «« v a nerson to be qualified to be chosen as 

Qualifications for Membership.— A person h 

a member in the State Legislature ( - 

(a) must be a citizen of India, 

. l .h- n vears of age in the case of the Legislative 

(b) ^ «*“• 

Council, . 1 . , 

(c) must possess such other qualified, oos a, may be prescribed by 

Parliament by law . 1 

Disqualifications foe memUrship.-A person is disqualified for being 
chosen a member of the Legislature of a Stale 

(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Central or State Goreru- 
ment, or 

(b) if he is of unsound mind, 

(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent, 

,/r -r h _ is not a citizen of India or has voluntarily acquired the citizen. 

(d> Ship of a foreign State or is under any acknowledgment of allegi- 
ance or adherence of a foreign State, 

(t \ if be is so disqualified by or under any law of Parliament.* The 

(C) necessary qualifications and disqualifications are prescribed by 
Parliament in the Representation of the Peoples Act, 1951. 

Article 190 deals with the disqualifications incurred by a member after ^hc 

Atncie m L. r n says that "no one can be a member of both 

has been of a state or a member of the Legislature of l»0 

the Houses of the Legislalur „ „ b chosto , mc „ b er D f the l.egis- 

or more Slates at the same um „ the expiry of the specified period coder 
lature ° r . lw “ °S“ m C „f“ s seat in the Legislalure shall fall vacant unless he 
rules made by President hts Slates . If a member of a Slate Legislature 

r h iE °ls hfms'elf'.ithoul the permission of the House from all meetings for a 
absents himself, .ithout t P : ^ ^ ^ House „ ptoro gued or 

period of Slaty days (exema g ^ s „ u , ive gays) the House may declare his 
sh\ S * "fTmemto become, disqualified under Cl. (1) of Art. 191 hl. 
seat shall become vacant. 

Decision on questions !he £$$££ SI 

question arises _as l °™ e “ of lbc disqualifications mentioned m clause 
State has become suD 7 c ?‘°. a n y ^ referred to the Governor and his decision 
\°fl taftoll Horve “he Go«,uor U required .0 obtain the opinion of 
fcEteUou Commissioner before giving bis decision on such question. 

The Constitution 13. accept resignations of members auto- 

directs the ! ° “bo™ i?s genulufur?. and 5 Ihen aeeepi it. If be finds 
be shall not accept!,. The amrndmrn. 

j. Article 173. 

2. Article 191. 

}. Article ISO (3). < 4 )- 
Const. 37 



290 CONITmmoriAL tAW OF INDIA [Chap, 

is an outcome of the Gujarat Student Movement where the MLAs were com* 
pelied to tender their resignations under threat and coercion. 

Before taking seat in the House, every member of State Legislature has to 
take oath or affirmation before the Governor or some person appionted by him 
for that purpose in the prescribed form. 1 Member of a State Legislature shall 
be entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be 
determined by the Legislature of the State by Jaw. 2 3 

Session* of the State Legislature.— According to Article 174 the Governor 
shall front time to time summon a House of the Legislature to meet at such 
time and place as be thinks fit. But sis months should not intervene between 
its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its sitting in the next 
session This means that the Assembly must meet at least twice a year and not 
more than six months must elapse between two sessions. 

The Governor may from time to time prorogue the House or either 
Houses. 8 But where there is a prorogation of the House, the new session must 
be called within six months. It is not necessary for the Governor to summon 
or prorogue the two Houses of the Legislature together. 

The Governor may dissolve the Legislative Assembly of a State. 4 5 6 In 
case of dissolution and prorogation the Governor can exercise his discretion to 
some extent. His discretion is non-justiciable and cannot be challenged even 
on ground of mala fide.* 

Under Article 175 the Governor has right to address either House of the 
Legislature of a State or both Houses assembled together. He may send 
messages to the Houses or House of the Legislature in respect of a Bill pend- 
ing In the Legislature or otherwise. When a message is so sent, it is the duty 
of the House to consider any matter tequirtd by the message to be? taken into 
consideration. 

At the commencement or the first session after each general election of 
the Legislative Assembly and also at the commencement of the first session of 
each year the Governor shall address the Legislative Assembly or both Houses 
assembled together if a State has two Houses and inform the Legislature of 
the causes of its summons. 8 

Aiticles 175 and 1 76 are exactly similar to those of Articles 86 and 87 
relating to the functions of the President. Thus the position of the Governor 
in relation to State Legislature is the same as that of the President in relation 
to Parliament. 

Speaker and Deputy Speaker.— The Speaker is the Chief Presiding Officer 
of the Legislative Assembly of a State. He is elected by the members of the 

1. Article 188, 

7. Article 195. 

3. Article 17* (2) (*)• 

4. Article 174(2) (b). 

5. to rc Veerabhadrayya, A. I. R. 1950 Mad. 243. 

6. Article 176 (1). 



24 } 


I U8 STATS LEGISLATORS 


m 

Assembly from their own members. The Assembly elects its Deputy Speaker 
also from its own members . 1 * The Deputy Speaker performs the duties of the 
Speaker when the Speaker is abseDt or while the office of the Speaker is 
vacant . 3 But if the office of the Deputy Speaker is also vacant, the duties of 
the office of the Speaker arc performed by such member of the Assembly as 
the Governor may appoint for the purpose. 

Both Speaker and the Deputy Speaker vacate their offices when they cease 
to be members of the Assembly. They may also resign from their offices. They 
can be removed from their offices, by the resolution of the Assembly passed by 
a majority of all the members of the Assembly.® For moving such a reso- 
lution fourteen days’ notice is required. 

The Speaker does not vacate his office on the dissolution of the Assem- 
bly. He continues in office until a new Speaker is elected before the new 
House meets. 

Powers and Functions of Speaker. — The position, duties and powers of 
the Speaker of a State Legislature are the same as those of the Speaker of the 
Lok Sabha. Once elected to this high office, he has to be above parly politics. 
The Speaker is an impartial and independent presiding officer. The importance 
of his office can be seen from the functions he performs and the powers he 
exercises to ensure the proper decorum in the Assembly. He presides over the 
meetings of the House, and regulates jiroceedings of the House. He is vested 
with disciplinary powers comparable with those of the Speaker of the House 
of Commons. He maintains decorum in the House during debates He inter- 
prets the rules of the Assembly and decides all points of order and questions 
of procedure. As such, he can ask a member to withdraw from the House 
for any violation of the rules of the House. He can suspend him for the 
whole session if the member disregards the authority and rulings of the chair. 
He can adjourn or suspend the session of the House in case of grave disorder. 
He certifies whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not. His rulings on the above 
points are final and cannot be challenged in I he court of law. In shorr, the 
Speaker is the custodian of the dignity of the House and an impanial arbitra- 
tor in its proceedings. It cannot be denied that the Speaker of a Legislature in 
India is vested with ibe same powers as are enjoyed by ihe Speaker of ihe 
House of Commons in England. But the High traditions of this office and 
the honour and dignity with which this office is looked upon in England has 
Dot been maintained in India. The conduct of the Speaker in West Bengal, 
Punjab and recently in Tamil Nadu has given rise to a demand that the Consti- 
tution be amended and the powers of the Speaker may be clearly laid down. 
The Speaker in these Slates have ruled that the Governments in these 
Slates were illegally constituted. In pursuance of their ruling, they adjourned 
the Assemblies of these States tine die. They based their rufings on the ground 
that persons selected! as Chief Minister by ibe Governor to form the ministry 
were not the leaders of the majority party and hence the Government headed 
by them was illegal. 

It is submitted that the legality or illegality of the Governor’s choice for 
a person for Chief Ministership cannot be decided by the Speaker. It is the 
House only which can decide by majority whether a person called by the 
Governor as Chief Minister commands the majority of the House or not. The 

I Article i ?*. 

2. AttKie ISO l«». 

j, Aiiwk I7y 



292 CONSrmjTIONAt. tAW OF INDIA [Chap. 

rulings of the Speaker in the two States were motivated by political considera- 
tions. 

It is a naked truth that the Speakers in these States have acted against the 
well-established high traditions of this dignified office. They have misused tbeir 
powers to adjourn the Assembly. U is the House which is Supreme and not 
the Speaker- He is simply a presiding officer and maintains order In the 
Assembly. Who is he to decide whether a Government is illegally constituted 
or not. This is clear from the practice of the House oF Commons in England. 

Chairman and Deputy Chairman of Lcgislalitc Council. 1 2 — The Legislative 
Council of each State elects iis Chairman and Deputy Chairman from among 
its own members. Like the Vice-President in the Rajya Sabha, the Governor 
is not the tx-cfficio Chairman of tbe Legislative Council. 

Like the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, tbe Chairman and Deputy 
Chairman may resign from their office, vacate their office when they cease to be 
member of the Council and may be removed from their offices. Provisions 
regarding their powers and functions arc similar to those of the Council of 
States in the Centre. 

The officers of the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council arc 
paid such salary and allowances as may be fixed by the Legislature of tbe Stale 
by law.® Till such a law is passed by tbe State Legislature they will get such 
salary and allowances as aie specified in tbe Second Schedule. 

Legislative Procedure— Article 196. 

Ordinary Dills.— The procedure of legislation in a State Legislature 
is broadly similar to that in the Parliament under Article 107. AH Dills, 
except a Money Dill or a Financial Bill, may originate in either House of tbe 
State Legislature. As is the case in the Centre, a Bill must be passed by both 
the Houses, either without amendments or with such amendments only as are 
agreed to by both the Houses, rxeept in tbe case of deadlock 

If a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted to 
tbe Legislative Council (a) is- rejected by the Council, (bj more than three 
months passed from the date on which the Bill is laid before tbe Council, with- 
out tbe Bill bemg passed by it, (cj tbe Dill is passed by the Council with amend- 
ments to which the Legislative Assembly docs not agree, the Assembly passes 
tbe Bill again in the same or in a subsequent session, with or without amend- 
ments suggested by the Council If after a Bill has so passed for the second 
time by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the Legislative Council 
which (a) rejects the Bill, fb) does not pass it within one month from the date 
on which it is laid before the Council, or (c) passes the Bill with amendments to 
which the Legislative Assembly does not agree, the Bill will be deemed to 
have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the 
Assembly for the second time.* 

Thus \ht duHvoo of W.t Lower House prevail* in regard to any Dill and 
tbe Upper House has only a suspensive vote for some time. 

A Bill pending in the Legislature of a State does not lapse by the reason 
to the prorogation of the House or Houses. A Bill pending in the Legislative 

1. Articles 182. 183, IS4. JS5. 

2. Article 166 

J. Article mtl) (2). 



24 ] 


TUB STATB LEGISLATURE 


293 


Couacil of a State which has not beta passed, docs not lapse on the dissolution 
of the Assembly. However, a Bill pending in the Legislative Assembly, or 
having been passed by it, is pending in the Legislative Council does not lapse 
on the dissolution of the Legislative Assembly. 1 2 * * 

Money Bills.— The definition given in Article 199 is similar to those in 
Article 110 relating to the Union Legislation. Like Union Legislature, a 
Money Bill must originate in the Lower House of the State Legislature (Legis- 
lative Assembly). A Money Bill cannot originate in the Legislative Council. 
After a Money Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly, it shall be 
transmitted to the Legislative Council for its recommendations. The Legisla- 
tive Council must return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly with its recom- 
mendations within a period of 14 days from the date of its receipt of the Bill. 
The Legislative Assembly may either accept or reject all or any of the recom- 
mendations of the Legislative Council. If the Legislative Assembly accepts 
any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall 
be deemed to have been passed by both Houses. With the amendments 
recommended by the Legislative Council imd accepted by the Legislative 
Assembly, if the Legislative Assembly rejects all the recommendations of the 
Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses 
in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly. But if a Bill 
is not returned by the Council within 14 days, it shall be deemed to have been 
passed by both Houses at the expiration of such period in the form in which 
it was originally passed by the Legislative Assembly.* 

If any question arises whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not the decision 
of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly shall be final. 8 There shall be 
endorsed on every Bill when it is sent to the Legislative Council and presented 
to the Governor for assent, the certificate of the Speaker of the Legislative 
Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.* 

Assent to Bills— Article 200. — When a Bill has been passed by both the 
Houses the Bill is sent to the Governor for bis assent. He may declare either 
that : 

(a) he assents to the Bill, 

(b) he withholds his assent, 

(c) he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President. At least 
in ooe case, where a Bill is likely to affect the powers of the High Court of a 
State, the Governor must reserve it for the consideration of the President, 

(d) he may return the Bill to the Houses for reconsideration. 

In the last case when a Bill, returned by the Governor for the reconsidera- 
tion of the Houses, is passed again by the Houses with or without am end meets 
and presented to the Governor for assent, the Governor shall not withhold 
assent second time. This means that he cannot reject the Bill. He must either 
give his assent or reserve the Bill for the consideration of the President. 

In case of (c), i. e,. when a Bill has been reserved by the Governor for 

1. Article 196 (J) (4) (S). 

2. Aril let 198 and 199 

J. Article l99(J). 

4 Article 199 (4). 



CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


m 


[Chap. 


the consideration of the President, the President may take one of the three 
courses : 

(i) he may assent to the Bill ; 

(ii) he may withhold assent ; 

(iii) he may, where the Bill is not a money Bill, direct the Governor 
to return the Bill to the House or Houses of the Slate Legislature for reconsi- 
deration. When a Bill is so relumed, the House then must reconsider the 
Bill within a period of six months from tbc dale of receipt. If it is again 
passed by the Houses, with or without amendment, it shall be presented again 
to the President for his consideration. 1 2 3 4 5 

When a Bill is presented for the second lime after reconsideration, the 
President may assent to the Bill or reject it. 

Procedure in financial matters— Articles 202 to 207.— In financial matters 
the procedure in the Stale is similar to that in Union. The procedure for the 
submission of the Annual Financial Statement, or the passing of the ‘Annual 
Appropriation Act,’ ‘Votes of Credit*. ‘Votes oo Accounts’ and supplementary 
grants, etc., is analogous to (hat in the Union under Article 112. 

General Rules ol prodcdurc.— As in the case of the Centre, a House of the 
Legislature of a State hasjright to make rules for regulating its procedure and 
conduct or his business. These rules art subject to the provisions of the Cons- 
titution.* Article 20s was amended by the Constitution {42nd Amendment) Act, 
1976, which emopwered the Houses of the Slate Legislatures to make rules for 
regulating its procedure and the quorum for the meeting of the Houses. The 
44th Amendment Act, I97S, has again restored the origioal position as it stood 
before the 42nd Amendment Act, 1976 The amendment omits the word* 
added to Article 208 by the 42nd Amendment Act. The validity of any proceed- 
ings in the Legislature shall not be called in question cm the grounds of alleged 
irregularity of the Procedure. 1 

No discussion shall take place in the Legislature of a Slate with respect to 
be conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the dis- 
charge or his duties.* 

Ordinance making power of the Gomnor. — The Ordinance making power 
Of the Governor under Article 213 is similar to that of the President un^'r 
Article 123 : 

(1) The Governor cau only issue Ordinances when the State Legisl 
and in the States having two Houses, both the Houses, is not in sessioo. 

(2) The Governor must be satisfied that circumstances exist which r 
it wieoes&uy Cot him. to take immediate action. The Court ca-woot cyiestU 
validity of the Ordinance on the ground that there was no necessity or sut 
ground for issuing the Ordinance by the Governor. The existence ot 
necessity is not a justiciable issue.* However the exercise of Ordinance im 

1. Article 201. 

2. Article 208. 

3. Article 212. 

4. Article 2||. 

5. Upendrs Lai v. Naraiani Devi. A. J» R* 19^8 M. P. 90. 


24] 


THB STATE LEGISLATURE 


295 


power is not discretionary. The Governor exercises this pow cr on tbe advice 
of the Cabinet. 

(3) The Ordinance must be laid before both Houses of the State Legis- 
lature when they assemble, and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six 
weeks from the re-assembly of the Legislature, unless it is approved earlier by 
the Legislature. The Ordinance may be withdrawn at any time by the 
Governor. 

(4) The Ordinance making power of the Governor is co-cxtensive with 
the Legislative powers of the State Legislature. He can only issue Ordinances 
on the subjects on which the State Legislature is empowered to make laws, e. g.. 
State list and Concurrent list. Both Central and State Legislature can make 
laws on subject mentioned in the '.Concurrent list. According to Article 213 (3) 
therefore, an Ordinance will be invalid to the extent, it makes any provision 
which would be invalid if enacted by tbe State Legislature. But such an 
Ordinance will not be invalid if it has been issued by the Governor in pursuance 
of instructions from tbe President. 

(5) The Governor cannot issue an ordinance without tbe instructions from 
the President in the following cases, (a) a Bill containing the same provision 
would have required the provisions sanction of the President for its introduction 
into tbe Legislature, (b) he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill 
for the consideration of the President, (c) an Act of the Legislature of the State 
containing the same provisions would have been invalid unless having been 
reserved for the consideration of the President and had received the assent of 
the President. 

An Ordinance shall have the same force and effect as an Act of the Legis- 
lature. It can override the judgment of the High Court under Article 226.* 

In Satja Pa! Dang v. Slate of Punjab * on March 8, 1968, the Speaker of 
the Punjab Legislative Assembly adjourned the House for two mouths making 
it impossible to pass the Appropriation Bill before the end of the financial year. 
The Governor, in order to overcome tbe crisis prorogued the Assembly on 
11th March had promulgated an Ordinance on March 13, prescribing the 
procedure for passing the budget and the Appropriation Bill, purporting to 
make the law for the timely completion of financial business contemplated by 
Article 209. The Ordinance provided that the House could be adjourned by 
a resolution of the House. The Assembly was re-summoned to meet on 
March 18. When the House met in session the Speaker ruled the session to 
have been illegally called and that his adjournment order of March 8, was 
still good. He then left the Chamber. Thereafter the Deputy Speaker occu- 
pied the chair and estimates and the Appropriation Bill was passed, the 
Deputy Speaker certified the Appropriation Bill which was considered by the 
Legislative Assembly and approved. The Bill was then assented to by the 
Governor. 

The questions involved were — 

(I) Whether the Governor was entitled under the Constitution to pro- 
mulgate an Ordinance in the circumstances 7 

l<) Whether a law contemplated by Article 209 can be prescribed by an 
Ordinance 7 



CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


254 


[Chap, 


the consideration of the President, the President may take one of the three 
courses : 

(i) he may assent to the Bill ; 

(ii) he may withhold assent ; 

(iii) he may, where the Bill is not a money Bill, direct the Governor 
to return the Bill to the House or Houses of the State Legislature for reconsi- 
deration. When a Bill i$ so returned, the House then must reconsider the 
Bill within a period of six months from the date of receipt. If it is again 
passed by the Houses, with or without amendment, it shall be presented again 
to the President for his consideration. 1 2 3 

When a Bill is presented for the second time after reconsideration, the 
President may assent to the Bill or reject it. 

Procedure in financial matters— Articles 202 to 207.— In financial matters 
the procedure in the State is similar to that in Union. The procedure for the 
submission of the Annual Financial Statement, or the passing of the 'Annual 
Appropriation Act,' 'Votes of Credit*, 'Votes on Accounts’ and supplementary 
grants, etc., is analogous to that in the Union under Article 112. 

General Rules of prodedure.— As in the case of the Centre, a House of the 
Legislature of a State hasjright to make rules for regulating its procedure and 
conduct of his business. These rules are subject to the provisions of the Cons- 
titution.* Article 208 was amended by the Constitution {42nd Amendment) Act, 
1 976, which emopwered the Houses of the Stale Legislatures to make rules for 
regulating its procedure and the quorum for the meeting of the Houses. The 
44th Amendment Act, 1978, has again restored the original position as it stood 
before the 42nd Amendment Act, 1976 The amendment omiis the words 
added to Article 208 by the 42nd Amendment Act. The validity of any proceed- 
ings in the Legislature shall not be called in question on the grounds of alleged 
irregularity of the Procedure.* 

No discussion shall take place in the Legislature of a State with respect to 
be conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the dis- 
charge of his duties. 4 5 

Ordinance making power of the Goternor.— The Ordinance making power 
of the Governor under Article 213 is similar to that of the President under 
Article 123 : 

(1) The Governor can only issue Ordinances when the State Legislature, 
and in the States having two Houses, both the Houses, is not in session. 

(2) The Governor must be satisfied that circumstances exist which render 
it necessary for him to take immediate action. The Court cannot question the 
validity of the Ordinance on the ground that there was no necessity or sufficient 
ground for issuing the Ordinance by the Governor. The existence of such 
necessity is not a justiciable issue.® However the exercise of Ordinance making 

1. Article 201. 

2. Article 208. < 

3. Article 21 2. 

4. Article 211. 

5. Upendra Lai v. Narayani Devi, A. I. R. 1968 M. P. 90. 



24| 


THB SFAl B LEGISLATURE 


295 


power is not discretionary- The Governor exercises this power on the advice 
of the Cabinet. 

(3) ■ The Ordinance must be laid before both Houses of the State Legis- 
lature when they assemble, and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six 
weeks from the re-assembly of the Legislature, unless it is approved earlier by 
the Legislature. The Ordinance may be withdrawn at any time by the 
Governor. 

(4) The Ordinance making power of the Governor is co-cxtensive with 
the Legislative powers of the State Legislature. He can only issue Ordinances 
on the subjects on which the State Legislature is empowered to make laws, e. g., 
State list and Concurrent list. Both Central and State Legislature can make 
laws on subject mentioned in the ; Concurrent list According to Article 213 (3) 
therefore, an Ordinance will be invalid to the extent, it makes any provision 
which would be invalid if enacted by the State Legislature. But such an 
Ordinance will not be invalid if it has been issued by the Governor in pursuance 
of instructions from the President 

(5) The Governor cannot issue an ordinance without the instructions from 
the President in the following cases, (a) a Bill containing the same provision 
would have required the provisions sanction of the President for its introduction 
into the Legislature, tb) he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill 
for the consideration of the President, (c) an Act of the Legislature of the State 
containing the same provisions would have been invalid unless having been 
reserved for the consideration of the President and had received the assent of 
the President. 

An Ordinance shall have the same force and effect as an Act of the Legis- 
lature. It can override the judgment of the High Court under Article 226. 1 

In Satja Pal Dang v. State of Punjab ,* on March 8, 1963, the Speaker of 
the Punjab Legislative Assembly adjourned the House for two months making 
it impossible to pass the Appropriation Bill before the end of the financial year. 
The Governor, in order to overcome the crisis prorogued the Assembly on 
llth March bad promulgated an Ordinance on March 13, prescribing the 
procedure for passing the budget and the Appropriation Bill, purporting to 
make the law for the timely completion of financial business contemplated by 
Article 209. The Ordinance provided that the House could be adjourned by 
a resolution of the House. The Assembly was re-summoned to meet on 
March 18. When the House met in session the Speaker ruled the session to 
have been illegally called and that bis adjournment order of March 8, was 
still good. He then left the Chamber. Thereafter the Deputy Speaker occu- 
pied the chair and estimates and the Appropriation Bill was passed, fhe 
Doyuij S(Kelce certi&al tbc Appeopristias Sell « hick coos fJeacJ brtbc 

Legislative Assembly and approved. The Bill was then assented to by the 
Governor. 

The questions involved were — 

(!) Whether the Governor was entitled under the Constitution to pro- 
mulgate an Ordinance in the circumstances ? 

(0 Whether a law contemplated by Article 209 can be prescribed by an 
Ordinance 7 



CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


294 


[Chap. 


the consideration of the President, the President may take one of the three 
courses : 

(i) he may assent to the Bill ; 

(ii) he may withhold assent ; 

(lii) he may, where the BiJJ is not a money Bill, direct the Governor 
to return the Bill to the House or Houses of the State Legislature for reconsi- 
deration. When a Bill is so returned, the House then must reconsider the 
Bill within a period of six months from the dale of receipt. If it is again 
passed by the Houses, with or without amendment, it shall be presented again 
to the President for his consideration. 1 

When a Bill is presented for the second time after reconsideration, the 
President may assent to the Bill or reject it. 

Procedure in financial matters— Articles 202 to 207.— In financial matters 
the procedure in the State is similar to that in Union. The procedure for the 
submission of the Annual Financial Statement, or the passing of the 'Annual 
Appropriation Act,’ ‘Votes of Credit’, ‘Votes on Accounts’ and supplementary 
grants, etc., is analogous to that in the Udiod under Article 112. 

General Rules of prodedurc.— As in the case of the Centre, a House of the 
Legislature of a State hasjright to make rules for regulating its procedure and 
conduct of his business. These rules are subject to the provisions of the Cons- 
titution, 2 Article 208 was amended by the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 
1976, which emopwered the Houses of the State Legislatures to make rules for 
regulating its procedure and the quorum for the meeting of the Houses. The 
44th Amendment Act, 1978, has again restored the original position as it stood 
before the 42nd Amendment Act, 1976 The amendment omits the words 
added to Article 208 by the 42nd Amendment Act. The validity of any proceed- 
ings in the Legislature shall not be called in question on the grounds of alleged 
irregularity of the Procedure.® 

No discussion shall take place in the Legislature of a State with respect to 
be conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the dis- 
charge of his duties.* 

Ordinance making power of the Gorernor.— The Ordinance making power 
of the Governor under Article 213 is similar to that of the President under 
Article 123 : 

(1) The Governor can only issue Ordinances when the State Legislature, 
and in the States having two Houses, both the Houses, is not in session. 

(2) The Governor must be satisfied that circumstances exist which render 
it necessary for him to take immediate action. The Court cannot question the 
validity of the Ordinance on the ground that there was no necessity or sufficient 
ground for issuing the Ordinance by the Governor. The existence of such 
necessity is not a justiciable issue.® However the exercise of Ordinance making 

t. Article 201. 

2. Article 208. 

3. Article 212. 

4. Article 211. 

5. Upcndra Lai v. Narayanl Devi, A. I. R. 1968 M. P. 90. 



25 

Tlxe State Judiciary 
(S-fts* 2X4 to 237) 

- ^noct, of a High Court and a system of courts 

The Judiciary iu Slato consists 01^ n g that lh „ e shall be a High 

subordinate to ^‘.“'ffomr under Arlicle 231 (0 Parliament can establish 
Court in each State. Howe e . more Slal£s or for , w0 or m0 re States 

and"” uS m T°rrUory. The High Court stands at the head of the judiciary in 

the State. —Every High Court consists of a Chief Justice 

Appointment of 0 ,. J 5 [he President may from time to time determine. 1 
and such other Judges a maximum number of Judges of a High 

Thus the Constitution do _ Court af(J appo i nlC( j by the President. The 

Court. The Judgi f h - chief Justice of a High Court after consultation with the 
President “PP 0,n f ts . lh di “ ao d the Governor of ibe Stale concerned.' In case of 
Ch,cf - ofa'Sudge other than the Chief Justice he may consult even the 

ffijSK of the H® Court concerned. 

appoint one of the Judge vacanl Qf bc i$ uaablc to perform bis du ties,® 

office of the CbiefJustt tb . rwisc . The President may appoint duly qualified 
by reason of absent o otn ^ the court fot a temporary period not «ceed- 
persons to be additiona j g ~ b atrcars of work in a High Court. 4 The 
fag two years, in order to cleat “» „. hcn m lm , £C of a High Court 

President “ unable to perform his duties by reason of absence 

other than Chief Jusuc pomlc j to act temporarily as Chief Justice An 

or for any other reason, or is pp^ [hj pcra3 „ enl JlllJg= ba s resumed his 

acting Judge »s W Chief Justice of a High Court may at any 

dunes- 6 Under Article .2 * Qf , be Prudent request retired judge, 

'oflhe w 8 h Con?. To si. ao? act as judges of the High Court. 

1 rtiee howe\cr, the appointment of the judges are made 
by the Presklenjon^be advice of the Council of Ministers. 

Transfer of 

sssr.wiffj « Hw. ‘°~zs~?Ett.Exs‘& 

-““rrrbrie , 7 

h the powtl ' of 0 f such a discretionary power ? In other word*, 
the conditions for the 0 rcoosultatioa with the Chief Justice asenwsag- 

vvhat ^ r ‘ t he 2 g°Pf r TTh^ questious were considered by the Supreme Court , a 


296 CONSimmONAL LAW OP INP1A [Chap. 

(3) Whether the Speaker had power to question the validity of the 

Ordinance ? ’ 

(4) Whether the Appropriation Bill passed by the Legislature could 
be challenged on the ground that the proper procedure had not been 
followed ? 

The Supreme Court held that the two Appropriation Acts passed by the 
Legislative Assembly on March 18, 1968, and the Governor’s Ordinance 
regulating the proceedings of the House were constitutionally valid. The 
power of the Governor to prorogue the House under Article 174 of the Cons- 
titution was absolute. This power was invoked by the Governor in order to 
overcome the Speaker’s ruling, adjourning the House which was aimed at 
filibustering, or otherwise to delay the business of the House. If there was 
on occasion for the regulation of financial business by law under Article 209 
of the Constitution it was this. The Legislature could not be allowed to 
hibernate for two months while financial business and the constitutional machi- 
nery and democracy itself were wrecked. 

The Governor’s re-summoning the Legislature immediately after the pro- 
rogation was also a step in the tight direction as it set up once a#un the demo- 
cratic machinery in the State which had been immediately disturbed by the 
actioD of the Speaker. This action of the Governor respected the democratic 
right of the Legislature. 

The power of the Governor to prorogue the House and promulgate an 
Ordinance was untrammelled by the Constitution. In the present case, an 
emergency had arisen and the action was perfectly understandable. The posi- 
tion in Puujab was that the Assembly was in Session, but it was in a state of 
inaction due to the Speaker's ruling. As the time was running out, to pass 
the budget the Governor had to act quickly to put back the Legislative machi- 
nery of the State into life and he could do so only by the constitutional powers 
vested in him. 

Commenting on the ruling of the Speaker that the House could not be 
re-summoned by the Governor when the House was adjourned the Supreme 
Court said ‘this ruling was based on the wrong assumption.’ 

The Speaker cannot pronounce upon the validity of the Governor’s 
Ordinance. It can only be challenged by the Legislative Assembly by a reso- 
lution. 



25) 


THE STATE JUDICIARY 


299 


though consultation with the Chief Justice of India is obligatory, it would not 
be strictly binding on the President. 


Qualifications. — A person to be qualified for appointment as Judge of a 
High Court— (a) must be a citizen of India, (b) must have held a judicial office 
for at least ten years, in the territory of India, (c) must have been an advocate 
of High Court for at least ten years. 1 

The Constitution (-44th Amendment) Act, 197S, has amended the Explanation 
to clause (2) for the purpose of removing an anomaly. Under the present 
clause (a) of the Explanation any period during which a person has, after 
becoming an advocate, held judicial office or tho office member of a tribunal or 
any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law will 
be included in computing the period during which he has been an advocate for 
the purpose of determining bis eligibility for appointment as a judge of a High 
Court. There is no corresponding provision in the Explanation in relation to a 
person who started as a Judge without being an advocate or a member of a 
tribunal or the bolder of any post under the Union or a State requiring 
special knowledge of law. This anomaly is being removed by adding a new 
clause which provides that in computing the period during which a person had 
held judicial office at any period shall be included during which the person 
had. been an advocate of a High Court or member of a Tribunal or held any 
post under the Union or a State requiring a special knowledge of law. 

Term and removal of Judges.— A Judge of the High Court shall hold 
office until he attains the age of 62 years. If a question arises as to the age of 
a Judge of a High Court, then it shall be decided by the President after con- 
sultation with the Chief Justice of India and the decision of the President shalf 
be final.* A Judge may, however, be removed from the office by the President 
in the same manner and on the same giounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court. 
The office of a Judge falls vacant by bis being appointed by President to be 
Judge of the Supreme Court or being transferred to any other High Court. 
A Judge may also resign his office by writing to the President. 8 

Restriction after Retirement. — Article 220 prohibits a person who has 
held office as a permanent Judge of a High Court to plead from acting or plead- 
ing in any court or before any authority in India except the Supreme Court 
and the other High Courts. This prohibition is necessary in order to main- 
tain the independence of the Judiciary. 


Salaries and Allowances.— The Judges of the High Court arc paid Such 
salaries as are specified in the Second Schedule. The Chief Justice at present 
gets a salary of Ks. 4,000 and other Judges Rs. 3,500 per month. They are 
also entitled to such allowances in respect ofleave and pension as Parliament 
may determine by law from time to time. Their salaries, allowances and pen- 
sions are charged on lbs Consolidated Fund of India cannot be varied to their 
disadvantage after their appointment* 

Before entering upon his office a Judge of a High Court shall have to 
lake an oath in the prescribed form before the Governor of that State or some 
Person appointed by him for that purpose affirming that he will bear true faith 
i" 7 nil c ounce to the Constitution of India and will perform the duties, of his 
office without fear and favour, affection or ill-will and will uphold the Constitu- 
tion and the laws. 


j A/lkle 217(1) and (J). 
1. Article 217 (J)- 


3. Article 22a 

4. Article 221 (Died (2*. 



298 


CONSTITUTION*!. LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


the case of Union of India v. Sankalchand . 1 In this case the constitutionality 
of a notification issued by the President by which Justice Sankalchand Sheth 
of the Gujarat High Court was transferred to the High Court of Andhra 
Pradesh, was challenged on the ground that the order was passed without the 
consent of the Judge amJ against public interest and without effective consulta- 
tion of the Chief Justice of India. The Supreme Court by a majority of 3 to 
2 (Bhagwati and Umawalia, JJ. dissenting) held that a Judge of a High Court 
can be transferred under Art. 222 (1) without his consent. If consent were 
imported in Art. 222 so as to make condition precedent to transfer a Judge 
from one High Court to another then a Judge by withholding consent could 
render the power contained in Art. 222 wholly ineffective and nugatory. The 
power to transfer a High Court Judge is conferred by the Constitution in 
public interest and not for the purpose of providing the executive with a wea- 
poa to punish a Judge who does not toe its line or who, for some reason or the 
other, has falleo from its grace The extraordinary power which the Constitution 
has conferred on the President by Art. 222 (I) cannot be exercised in a manner 
which is calculated to defeat or destroy in one stroke the object and purpose of 
the various provisions conceived with such care to insulate the judiciary from 
the influence and pressures of the executive. Once it is appreciated that a High 
Court Judge can be transferred on the ground of public interest only, the appre- 
hension that the executive may use the power of transfer for its own ulterior 
ends and thereby interfere with the independence of the judiciary, loses its 
force. Also, Art. 222 (I) casts an absolute obligation on the President to con- 
sult the Chief Justice of India before transferring a judge from one High Court 
to another. That is the condition precedent to the actual transfer of the Judge. 
The consultation with the Chief Justice of India must be effective one. It 
means that while consulting the Chief Justice the President must make the 
relevant data available to him on the basis of which he can offer to the presi- 
dent, the benefit of his considered opinion. If the facts necessary to arrive al 
a ptopeu conclusion arc not madei available to the Chief Justice, he must ask 
for them because, in casting on the President the obligation to consult the 
Chief Justice, the Constitution at the same time must be taken to have imposed 
a duty on the Chief Justice to express his opinion on nothing less than a full 
consideration of the matter on which he is entitled to be consulted. The ful- 
filment by the President to this constitutional obligation to place full facts 
before tbe Chief Justice and the performance by the latter of the duty to elicit 
facts which are necessary to arrive at a proper conclusion are parts of 
the same process are complementary to each other. Consultation within the 
meaning of Art. 222 (1), therefore, means full and effective, not formal or 
unproductive consultation. 

filing wall and Untavcalia, JJ. delivered a dissenting judgment and held that 
a Judge of a High Court cannot be transferred without his consent. Bhagwati, 
J., said that the word ‘transfer’ is a neutral word which can mean consensual 
as well as compulsory transfer and if the independence of superior judiciary 
is from all forms of Executive interference is to be achieved the word ‘transfer’ 
must be read in a limited sense of consensual transfer. If a High Court Judge 
could be transferred without the consent then it would give the executive 
dangerous power to punish a judge by transferring him from one High Court 
to another if he decides cases against the Government. That would greatly 
undermine the independence of Judiciary. It is no doubt true that previous 
consultation with the Chief Justice of India is a condition precedent to the 
exercise of power by the Executive but it does not afford sufficient protection 
to the High Court Judge against unjustified transfers. It is settled law that 
l. A- 1. R. 1977 S. C. 2328. 



25] 


THE STATE JUDICIARY 


301 


employee by l he Industrial Tribunal was wrongful or justified. The Supreme 
Comt held that the High Court cannot interfere with the decision of the 
Trihunal In the words of the Supreme Court "Unless there was grave mis* 
carriage ' of justfee^or flagrant violation of law the High Court could not 
interfere The power should not ordinarily be exercised if some alternative 
remedy ‘is available. However, the existence of alternative remedy is no bar 
if without High Court's interference, flagrant violation of law is likely to result 
if the alternative remedy is not effective or speedy."' 

Transfer of certain cases to High Courts.— Under Article 228 the High 
Court has power to withdraw a case from a subordinate Court 
m it if it is satisfied that a case pending in a subordinate Court 
involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the 
Constitution. It may then either dispose of the ca« itself or may determine 
the said question of law and return the case to the subordinate Court with a 
copy of its judgment. The subordinate Court will tben decide the case in 
conformity with the High Court judgment. 

The 42nd Amendment Act, 1976, has amended Art. 228 of the Constitution. 
The Amendment has put an important restriction on the power of the High 
Court to withdraw cases from subordinate courts. 

The High Courts will now exercise their powers subject to the new 
Article 131 -AT which gives exclusive jurisdiction to the Supreme Court to decide 
the validity of central laws to the exclusion of the High Courts. It means that 
if in a proceeding before a subordinate court the question of val, dity of any 
ceirtal laws a!S 8 involved the High Court will have no power to withdraw such 
a case and decide. _ . . - , 

It is to be noted that under the Amendment the High Court must be satisfied 
tha the determmation of that question is necessary for the disposal of the case. 
Under Article 235 the High Court has disciplinary jurisdiction over sub- 

° tdlDa it hl o b ecn held that the Government had no jurisdiction to take discjpli- 
“ Pf* L District Judge. U is the High Court alone which is 

nary action agains j:, r : n ji nar v cower against a judge of the inferior court.* 
“r 111 ,,!™. S Kbl High Court quashed an order of the 
In State a senior subordinate judge uuder Rule (c) of 

Governor compulsor ly j ^ ^ [he Q(1 tbat the order was passed by the 
Punjab Civil S c e ”‘ c / r ^ ommcndat ion of the High Court. The Court held 
Governor against the High Court was binding on State Government, 

that the rc c° I * °^ 1 ^Lf t a !hy i t°ansfer of District Judge was outside the power of 
It was also held ^ihat _th I H fay thc High Court under the power vested in 

the Governor and had t 0= unUke Art i c lc 228 does not mention ‘Tribunals . 
it by Article 235. lhere fore, cannot be exercised over Tnbunals. 

The power under Article 

(O fhS uow'ilhsfandins anything in Article B every 

Article 226 provides in ^ out , hc ,„ n , ona l limits in relaUou 10 

High Court h ?'. e , c ,P°“; o 'i ls ue to any person or aulhorlly. including in 

which it exercises jonsdrewn rtS^ itrrilories, directions, orders 

S ' % 3£M8 

1 ££ Jr its SttV Nrrrend,. *.*«*■>«.*- K- 

J. A. L R- »9' 6S r " * 

4 Stale of Assam 



300 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


{Chap, 


JURISDICTION OF THE HIGH COURT 

(a) A Court of Record.— Article 215 declares that every High Court shall 
be a Court of record and shall have all powers of such a court including 
power to punish for its contempt. The scope and nature of the power ot 6 
Court under this Article is similar to the powers of the Supreme Court utw 
Article 129. . 

(b) General Jurisdiction. — Article 225 says that subject to the provisions 
of the Constitution and to the provisions of any law of the appropriate Legisla- 
ture (a) the jurisdiction of the High Court, (b) the law administered itt IK 
existing High Court, ^c) the powers of the Judges in relation to the administra- 
tion of justice in the courts, (d) the power to make rules of the High Court shall 
be the same as immediately before the commencement of this Constitution. 
Thus the pre-Conslitutional jurisdiction of the High Court is preserved by M® 
Constitution. Art. 225 thus gave jurisdiction over revenue matters. 
In pre-CoQstitution period the decisions of the Privy Council were binding 
on all the High Courts under section 212 of the Government of Iud ja 
Act. The effect of tbe present Article is the same and they are still binding on 
the High Courts unless it is reversed by the Supreme Court or by a law of tbe 
appropriate Legislature. 

This means that the jurisdiction and powers of the High Courts can be 
changed both by the Union Parliament and the State Legislatures. 

(C) Powers ot superintendence over all courts by (be High Courts.— Under 
Article 227 every High Court has the power of superintendence over all courts 
and tribunals throughout the territory in relation to which it exercises jurisdic- 
tion. For this purpose, the High Court may call returns from them, make and 
issue general rules and prescribe forms for regulating tbe practice and proceed- 
ings of such courts and prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts 
are to be kept by the officers of such courts, and settle table of fees to be given 
to tbe sheriff, clerks, officers, attorneys, advocates and pleaders. However, this 
power of superintendence of High Court does not extend over any Court or 
Tribunal consiituted by any law relating to tbe aimed forces. 

The power of superintendence conferred on the High Court by this Article 
is a very wide power. This power is wider than the power conferred on the 
High Couit to control inferior courts through writs under Art. 226. It is not 
confined to administrative superintendence but also judicial superintendence 
over all subordinate Courts within its jurisdiction. 1 2 This power of superin- 
tendence conferred on the High Court by Article 227 being extraordioay to be 
exercised most sparingly and only in appropriate cases in order to keep tbe 
subordinate Courts within the bounds of their authority and not for correcting 
mere enor of Tact, however, erroneous those may be.* The main grounds on 
which the High Court usually interferes are when the inferior courts act arbit- 
rarily or act in excess of jurisdiction vested in them, or fail to exercise jurisdic- 
tion vested in them, 3 or act in violation of principles of natural justice,* or if 
there is error of law apparent on tbe face of record. In D. N. Barter ji v. P. R. 
Mukherji ,* the question was whether on the facts of the case the dismissal or an 

1. Waryarn Singh v, Amarnaih. A 1. R. 1954 $. C. 215 ; Hari Vishnu v. Ahmad 
Ishaque, A 1. R. 1955 S C. 233 1 BabtmlmaJ v. Laxmibai, A. I. R. 1975 S. C. 1297- 

2. India Pipe Filling Co. v. Fakruddin, A. I. R. 1978 S. C. 45 ; \V aryam Singh v. 
Amarnaih, A. I. R. 1954 S. C- 215. 

3. Ibid. 

4 Sanlosh v Moot Singh, A. I. R. t958 S. C 32J 

5 Ai.R *953 S. C 58 at p. 5? 



25] 


■ ■ TUB STAI8 JUDICIARY 


303 


These prerogative writs are borrowed fro n English law but in view of 
the express provisions in our Constitution the Courts in India are not bound to 
look back to early history or the procedural technicalities of those writs in 
English Law. They can exercise this power keeping in view the broad funda- 
mental principles of these writs followed in the English law. 1 The power of 
High Court is. not confined only to issuing of the writs, it can issue a suitable 
‘direction’ or ‘order’ to any person or authority within its jurisdiction Thus 
Article 226 enables the High Court to examine the action of administrative and 
executive officials and to jive relief to an aggrieved person. 

Generally speaking, administrative orders confer no justiciable right. 
There are, however, exceptions. There are administrative orders which confer 
rights and impose duties. The Orissa State Urban Land Settlement Rules of 
1959, however, confer no rights on a person whose application for grant of a 
nazul plot of laad is disposed of fairly by the Revenue authorities. 2 

2. Territorial extent of writ-jurisdiction. — Article 226 imposes two-fold 
limitation on the power of the High Court to issue writs. Firsty, the power is 
to be exercised throughout the territory in relation to which it exercises juris- 
diction, that is to say, the writs issued by the High Court cannot run beyond 
the territories Subject to its jurisdiction. Secondly, the person or authority 
against which the writ is issued must be “within those territories” which im- 
plies that they must be amenable to the jurisdiction of the Court by reason of 
residence or location within those territories. 

In Election Commission of India v. Venkata Rao , 3 the Madras High Court 
had issued a writ against Election Commission having its office permanently 
located at New Delhi. The Court held that the Madras High Court had no 
power to issue a writ against Election Commission which is outside its jurisdic- 
tion. The mere fact that the effects of the order of a person or authority are 
produced within the territory of the High Court if the cause of action arises 
within its jurisdiction is not sufficient to invest the High Court with jurisdiction 
under Article 226 to issue a writ. 4 The Punjab High Court can only issue a 
writ to Central authorities which are located in Delhi. As a result of the 
Supiemc Court decision relief against the Central Govermmcnt could only be 
sought in Delhi. 

The Law Commission had expressed the view that these limitations had 
reduced the utility of Article 226 and, is fact they had defeated the very purpose 
of this Article. The Commission had recommended the removal of these limi- 
tations on a person seeking relief under Article 226.* Accordingly, the 
Constitution was amended by the Constitution < 15th Amendment) Act, 1963. 
Article 226 now permits High Court within whose jurisdiction the cause of 
action in whole or in part arises to issue directions, orders or writs to any 
Government or authority notwithstanding that the autboriry or the Government 
is located in Delhi if the cause of action in whole or in part arises in its 
jurisdiction. 

3. Discretionary kemedy. — The remedy provided for in Aitide 226 4 a 

1 T. C. Basappa v. Nagappa, A. I. R- t9S4 S. C- 440 ; D»»rka Nath v. t. T. O., A. I. R. 

1966 S C. SI. 

7 AIR IWJ S. C. 2KX See also Madao Copal v Secretary io Government of Omu, 

A. 1. R. s C. IS»3. 

i A. I. R •“75 S C. 4J4 

« it t smut v Competent Officer, A. I. R- IW S. C. 1244. 

5. See 1 aw Commission Report XIV, P- 66. 



304 


CONSIl I UTION AJ- LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


discretionary remedy and the High Court has always the discretion to refuse to 
grant any writs if it is satisfied that the aggrieved party cap have an adequate 
or suitable relief elsewhere.' This remedy cannot be claimed as a matter of 
right. The High Court must exercise its discretion on judicial consideration 1 
and on well-established principles nless the High Court is satisfied that the 
normal statutory remedy is likely to be too dilatory or difficult ,to give reason- 
able, quick relief, it should be loath to act under Art/. 226. The High Court 
should be caieful to be extremely circumspect in granting these reliefs especially 
during the pendency of criminal investigations. The investigation of a 
criminal case is a very sensitive phase where the investigation authority has to 
collect evidence from all odd corners and anything that is likely thwart it* 
course may inhibit the interests of justice. 2 But the rule that it may refuse 
to grant any writ where alternative remedy is available as only a rule of 
direction and not a mle of law, 3 and instances are numerous where a writ 
had been issued in spite of the fact that the aggrieved party had other adequate 
legal remedy. 4 

The existence of an alternate adequate remedy is, however, no bar to the 
exercise of writ-jurisdiction where the relief is involved in case of infringement 
of fundamental rights 5 or where there is complete lack of jurisdiction 5 or where 
the order has been passed in violation of natural justice by the subordinate 
court.’ Existence ol alternative remedy is also no ground to refuse to issue 
writ where the action is being taken under any invalid law or arbitrarily with- 
out sanction of a law." 

The High Court will not go into the disputed question of fact in exercise 
of its writ-jurisdiction.® 

It has been held by the Supreme Court that the High Courts cannot use 
the Article for the purpose of giving interim relief. The existence of legal right 
is the basis of the exercise of jurisdiction of court under the Article. If the 
High Court is of opinion that there was no other convenient or adequate reme- 
dy open to the petitioner, it may proceed to investigate the case on the merit 
and come to ibe conclusion that the petitioner has succeeded in establishing that 
his legal right has been infringed which entitled him to a writ pending such de- 
termination of the legal right on merit, it may make suitable interim order of 
maintaining the status quo ante. 10 

The power conferred on the High Court by Article 226 cannot be taken 
away or abridged by any law except by an amendment of the Constitution.* 1 ' 

Effect of laches or delay in filing petition under Article 226. — T he remedy 

1. Rashid Ahmad v. Income-tax Investigation Commission, A. I. R. 1954 S. C. 207 : C A. 

Abrabam v. I. T. Officer, A. I. R. 1961 S. C. 609. 

2. Assistant Collector, Central Excise r. J. H. Industries, A. I. R- 1979 S. C, 1889. 

3. A. V. Venkneswatam v. R. S. Wadtvftiui, A- L R. 1961 S- C. IS06. 

4. Slate of U. P. v. Mobd. Nooh. A. I. R. 1958 S. C. 86. 

5. Him mat Lai v Slate of U. P.. A L R. 1954 S. C. 403. 

6. A V. VenXateywarsra v. R, S. Wadhwani, A. 1. R. 1961 S- C. 1SQ6. 

7. State of U. P. v. Mohd . Nooh, A. 1. R. 1958 S. C. 86. 

8. Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co. v. Assistant Commissioner, Commercial Taxes, 

A. I.R.I967S.C. 1401. 

9. Burmah Construction Co. v- State of Orissa, A. L R. 1961 S. C. 1320. 

10. State of Orissa v. Madan Copal, A. I. R. 1922 S. C. 12. 

11. Sangram Singh v. Election Tribunal, A. I. R. 1955 S. C. 425. 



25] 


THE STATE JUDICIARY 


305 


provided under Art, 226 should be sought within a reasonable time. In- 
ordinate delay in invoking the jurisdiction of the Court may be good ground 
for refusing to grant relief. It is not that there is any period of limitation for 
the Courts to exercise their powers under Art. 226, nor is it that there can 
never be a case where the courts cannot interfere in a matter after the passage 
of certain length of time. But it would be a sound and wise exercise of dis- 
cretion for the courts to refuse to exercise their extraordinary powers under 
Article 226 in case of persons who do not approach it expeditiously for relief 
and who stand by and allow thing? to happen and then approach the Court to 
forward stale claims and try to unsettle matters. The aforesaid observations 
were made by the Supreme Court in P. S. Sadasivasuamy v. State of Tamil 
Nadu. 1 In this case the Court held that where a Government servant slept 
over the promotions of his juniors over his head for 14 years then approached 
the High Court challenging the relaxation of relevant rules in favour of the 
junior, the writ-petition is liable to be dismissed in limine. Such an aggrieved 
person should approach the Court at least within six months or at the most a 
year of promotion of his juniors. 

In Lachmandas v. Union of India,* the appellant was dismissed from 
service by an order by the Court Martial, dated May 17, 1966. He filed an 
appeal from that order to the Chief of the Army Staff who by his order dated 
Dec. 21, 1966 set aside the order of dismissal and substituted in its place an 
order of discharge with retrospective effect from July II, 1968. Four years 
thereafter the appellant filed a writ-petition in the High Court, /. e. on Sep. 22, 
1970, which was dismissed in limine by the High Court. He filed the present 
appeal in the Supreme Court against the High Court’s order. The Supreme 
Court held that writ-petition was filed after a gross delay (4 years) for which 
there is no explanation, and therefore, the High Court was justified in dismiss- 
ing it summarily. 


WRITS 


1. Habeas Corpus.— “Habeas Corpus'* is a Latin term which literally 
means "you may have the body”. The writ is issued in form of an order 
calling upon a person by whom another person is detained to bring that person 
before the Court and to let the Court know by what authority he has detained 
that person. If the cause shown discloses that there is no legal justification 
for detention the Court will order immediate release of the detained person. 
Thus the main object of the writ is to give quick and immediate remedy to a 
person who is unlawfully detained by the person whether in prison or private 
custody. 

In Kami Sanya! v. District Magistrate, Darjeeling,* the Supreme Court 
held that while dealing with the application of writ of habeas corpus production 
of the body of the person detained is not essential, fn that case the lop-rank- 
ing Naxahte leader. Kanu Sanya), was arrested in 1971 anJ was detained with- 
out trial in the Visikhapalnam Jail. He moved the Supreme Court for a writ 
under Article 32 of the Constitution challenging the legality of his deiention 
and praying for the Court’s order for his production before the Court. The 
Court issued the rule aiii, but not the production of the detenue. Council 


a I. R. 1971 S. C 2171. See also I.C. N. Sabakari Simui *. Siase of RjUuhjn. 
a! I. It- 197* S. C. 20SS ; Afliloan v. L- R. Guieroor. Delhi, A. 1. R. 1974 S. CL 2077. 
A. I R. 1977 S. C. 1979. 

A. I- R. 1974 S.C 310. 

Const. 39 



CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


appearing fot the de.enuc, contended the ^£ 1 0 “ e aM« h of’w« of labeas 

alleged 10 be illegally det*'^ . aIld ,hat the Court can dispose of 

-- ■ 


„ petition only after the petui Article 32 the 

Bhagwati, J held that in a f o [^ t f 0 „"7tllined to be brought before 

S the jurisdietroe of the Supreme Court^W deal 5;“^ ^ 

Court may deal wrth the legalhj f ^ - ht berotelhe Corirr, and if detention 
JSa’SatffS" be released forthwith. 


ind unlawful, oraer mm uo 

The Court said there was . ^“nrrrtng thelega'ity of the’delention and 
merely a slip in the Unlawfully retrained should be elevated to the 

securing the relea * e [ wt j t -'Why should we hold ourselves m fetter 

b b fr;"i& 

-S-SttfS- 00 teltya °“ in Hi! Lor ‘ ish,p 

observed : 


c . 
.. Ib e practice followed in Uuhed Sums of S& 

illegally detained wnhoot reqiu ring ^ , ht CouI , said . Tor it concerns 

discloses a PJ^B^l^L^nlishinent of the primary purpose of the proceedings 
itself mote with the “ b ““Xou8 element’. The Constitution makers 

than with competence with P . dealing with ah application for a writ 

could « « “tlJSS^^SSJd shut its eyes to the development 
under Article 32, the huprem ^ 0 t eaJ corpus in the last 200 years in the 
in the law in regard an ^the manner in which the jurisdiction in regard to the 

country of its origin and th , hc country 0 f its adoption across the 

writ of ' w6 f.^^ the facts of history allow itself to the petrified in the age 
JfSJtSi’. Sd'SsEitU when the writ was struggling to emerge as au 
effective weapon for the protection of person s liberty. 


ive weapon 101 r 

me can apply 

W ”“ d ' b » % r p “ S ° f ° £ ea , ce rpJ can be made by an, pe.son on behalf of .be 
prisoneri. e. a friend or a relation. 


Tl , . TK e w rit of habeas carpus will lie if the power of deten- 

When it ™ U, '*-T a was exercised mala fide and is made for collateral or 

tion vested m an authority was d ^. 0n _ s ^ „ lgh Court will not 

ulterior purposes. But If the following conditions are satisfied the 

grant the writ of jf ^“detention is made in accordance with the pro- 

detention is not MW Th g j w must be valid law and the procedure must 

*S£. - lawful lf.be la.d dowu m 

Article 22 are complied with- 


icle 22 are conip™« — 
to he released on a writ of habeas corpus. 


|. A. K. Copal an v. State of Madras. A. I. R. 1950 S. C. 27. 
2. Article 21* 



25) 


THE STATE JUDICIARY 


307 


The legislature which deprives a person of his personal liberty by law 
must be competent to make that law. If the law is unlawful the detention will 
be unlawful. 

An appeal lies against an order of the High Court granting or rejecting 
the application for issue of the habeas corpus under Articles 132, 133, 134, or 
136. > 

2. Mandamus.— The word “mandamus” means “the order”. The writ 
of mandamus is thus an order by a superior court commanding a person or a 
public authority (including the Government and public corporation) to do or 
forbear to do something in the nature of public duty or in certain cases of a 
statutory duty. 2 For iastance a licensing officer is under a duty to issue 
a licence to an applicant who fulfils all the conditions laid down for the issue of 
such licence. But despite the fulfilment of such conditions if the officer or the 
authority concerned refuses or fails to issue the licence the aggrieved person 
has a right to seek the remedy through a writ of mandamus. 

When it will lie. — Thus the writ or order in the nature of a mandamus 
would be issued when there is a failure to perform a mandatory duty. But even 
in cases of alleged breaches of mandatory duty the party must show that be has 
made a* distinct demand to enforce that duly and the demand was met with 
refusal.* 

(1) The writ of mandamus can only be granted when there is in the 
applicant a right to compel the performance of some duty cast 
upon the authority.* The duty sought to be enforced must be a 
public duty, that is, duty cast by law. A private right cannot be 
enforced by the writ of mandamus. 

(2) The writ of mandamus can be issued to a public authority to res- 
train it from acting under a law which has been declared uncons- 
titutional. 

Thus a writ of mandamus can be granted only in cases where there is a 
statutory duty imposed upon the officer concerned, and there is a failure on ihe 
part of that officer to discharge the statutory obligation. The chief function 
of a writ is to compel performance of public duties prescribed by statute 
and to keep subordinate tnbuual and officers cacrcisiog public functions within 
the limits of their jurisdiction. It follows, therefore, that an order for mandamus 
may be issued to compel the auihorities to do something which imposes a legal 
duty and the aggrieved party has a legal right under the statute to enforce its 
performance. 

When it will not lie.— A writ of mandamus will not be granted in the 
following circumstances : 

(l) When the duty is merely discretionary in nature the writ of mandamus 
will not lie. la Stan of St. P. v. Mandamus a, 1 tbe M. P. Government made 
a rule making it discretionary to grant dearness allowance to its employee* at 


R v. liana SecrcUry. C*-p«« O’Onca, (192)) 2 K. B. )6| *i p. 

S« A- T- Marlon: JuJtial Control of Aanuetiuuure—Cooiroi AAauatUrtu*< 
Adi on la lulu, P- 36S. 

Saru «*U InJustilal Syndicate Lid. v. I'uoo of InUu. A. I. R. IMJ £. C. *60 ; 
lUliburj’s Law* of Upland. 3rd &L, Vot. I). p. t06. 

Sraie ot M. K v. C. C. MscJuui, A.I. R. IMS 5. C 1)1 


y lt*4 



308 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap 


a particular rate. The Supreme Court held that the writ of mandamus could 
not be issued to compel the Government to exercise its power. 

(2) A writ of mandamus does not iie against a private individual or any 
private organisation because they are not entrusted with a public duty. 1 2 3 4 * 

(3) A writ of mandamus cannot be granted to enforce an obligation 
arising out of a contract. 9 

3. Prohibition.— A writ of prohibition is issued primarily to prevent an 
inferior court or tribunal from exceeding its jurisdiction, or acting contrary to 
the rules of natural justice. It is issued by a superior Court to inferior courts 
for the purpose of preventing inferior courts from usurping a jurisdiction with 
which it was not legally vested, or in other words to compel inferior courts to 
keep within the limits of their jurisdiction,* 

Thus the writ is issued in both cases where there is excess of jurisdiction 
and where there is absence of jurisdiction.* 

Prohibition aod certiorari Distinguished.— Prohibition has much in 
common with certiorari. Both the writs are issued with the object of restrain- 
ing the inferior courts from exceeding their jurisdiction. The difference between 
the two writs was explained by the Supreme Court in the following words : 

“When an inferior court takes up for hearing a matter over which it 
has no jurisdiction, the person against whom the proceedings are 
taken can move the superior Court for a writ of prohibition and 
on that an order will issue forbidding the inferior court from 
continuing the proceedings. On the other hand, if the court hears 
the cause or matter and gives a decision, the party aggrieved 
would have to move the superior Court for a writ of ceriorari on 
that an order will be made quashing the decision on the ground of 
jurisdiction.” 

When the case is pending before the Court but it has not finally been 
disposed of, the superior court has to apply both prohibition and certiorari — 
prohibition to prevent the court to proceed further with the case and 
certiorari for quashing what had already been decided. 6 Thus the object of 
the writ of prohibition is in short prevention rather than cure, while certiorari 
is used as a cure. 

Where the defect in the jurisdiction is not apparent, where the appellant 
is guilty of suppression of material fact, or where the writ would be futile the 
court may refuse to grant the writ. But it can be granted almost as a matter of 
right where it is shown that the inferior tribunal is acting in excess of its juris- 
diction. 6 i 

Prohibition, like certiorari, lies only against judicial and quasi-judicial 
bodies. It does not lie against a public authority which acts purely in an 
executive or administrative capacity, nor to a legislative body. 


1 . Band* Kama v. Stale of V. est Bengal, A. I. R. 1961 Cal. 161. 

2. Bihar E. G. F. Co-operative Society v. Sipahi Singh, A. I. R. 1977 S. C. 2U9. 

3. East India Commercial Co. v. Collector of Customs, A. I. R. 1962 S. C. 1893. 

4. S. Govinda Menon v. Union of India, A. 1. R. 1967 S. C. 1274. 

3. Han Vishnu Kamaih v. Ahmad Isbaque. A. 1. R. 1953 S. C. 233. 



1HE STA1B JUD1CIAVY 


309 


25j ■■ 


4. Certiorari.— A writ of certiorari is issued by a superior Court 
(Supreme Court and High Courts) to au inferior court or body exercising 
judicial or quasi-judicial functions to remove a suit from such inferior court 
or body and adjudicate upon the validity of the proceedings or body exercising 
judicial or quasi-jud’cial functions. It may be used before the trial to prevent 
as excess or abuse or jurisdiction and to remove the case for trial to higher 
court. It is invoked also after trial to quash an order which has been made 
without jurisdiction or in violation of the rules of natural justice. Speaking 
on the scope of the writ the Supreme Court in the Pror 'uce of Bombay v. 
Kiiushaldas, 1 held that : 

(1) Whenever any booy of persons having legal authority to determine 
questions affecting the rights of subjects and having the duty to act 
judicially, acts in excess of their legal authority, a writ of certiorari 
lies. It does not lie to remove merely ministerial acts or to remove 
or cancel executive cr administrative acts. 

(2) For this purpo*e, the term 'judicial' docs not necessarily mean 
acts of a judge or a legal tribunal sitting for determination of 
matters of law, but for the purpose of this question a judicial act 
seems to be an act done by competent authority, upon considera- 
tion of facts and circumstances and imposing liability or affecting 
the right of others. 

Writ lies Against Judicial bodies.— One of the fundamental principles 
in regard to the issuing of a writ of certiorari is that the writ can be availed 
of only to remove or to adjudicate upon the validity of judicial acts. The 
expression “judicial acts” includes the exercise of quasi-judicial functions by 
administrative bodies or authorities or persons obliged to exercise such 
functions and is used in contrast with what are purely ministerial act.* Whether 
a body is to act in a judicial manner or not is a question to be decided in 
each case in the light of the circumstances of the case. The Supreme Court 
ha» laid down two propositions for ascertaining whether an authority is to act 
judicially 

(1) if a statute empowers an authority to decide disputes arising out 

of a claim made by one party under the statute, which claim is 
opposed by another party, then prima facie and in the absence of 
anything in the statute to the contrary it is the duty of the 
authority to act judicially and the decision of the authority is a 
quasi-judicial act ; and 

(2) if a statutory authority has power to do any act which will pre- 
judicially affect the subject, then although there arc not two 
parties apart from the authority and the contest is between the 
authority, proposing to do the act and the subject opposing it, the 
final determination of the authority will be a quasi-judicial act 
provided the authority is required by the statute to act judicially.* 

Grounds on which writ can be issued.— The writ of certiorari is issued to 
a judicial or quasi-judicial body on the following grounds : 

(a) Where there is want or excess of jurisdiction ; 


A. I. R. I950S.C. 22'. 

T. C. Basappa v. T. Nagappa, A. I. R. 1954 SC 440 *t p. 414. 

Province of Bombay v Kbuihalda*, A.' l. R.. 1950 SC 222 ; T, C Basappa v. Nagappa, 
A. I. R. 19M S. C. 440 ; Shiva;* Naihubhai v. Union of India, A. I. R. 1C*60S. C. C06. 



310 


CONSriTUrjONAL LAW OP INDIA {Cbap. 

(b) Where there is violation of procedure or disregard of principles of 
natural justice ; 

(c) Where there is error of Jaw apparent on the face of the record bat 
not error of a fact. 

(a) Want or excess of jurisdiction. — The writ of certiorari is issued to a 
body performing judicial or quasi-judicial functions for correcting errors of 
jurisdiction, as when an inferior court or tribunal acts without jurisdiction, or 
in excess of it, or fads to exercise it. 1 The want of jurisdiction may arise 
from the nature of subject-matter, so that the inferior court had no authority 
to enter on the enquiry or upon some part of it. Want of jurisdiction may 
also arise from the absence of some preliminary proceedings or upon the 
existence of some particular facts which are necessary to the exercise of court's 
power and the court wrongly assumes that particular condition exists.* 

2. For Correcting Error of law apparent on the face of record. — The writ 
is also issued for correcting an error oflaw apparent on the face of record. 
It cannot be issued to correct an error of fact. What is an error of law 
apparent on the face of record is is to be decided by the Courts on the facts of 
each case.® In Harl Vishnu v. Ahmad /shaque,* the Supreme Court held that no 
error could be said to be error on the face of the record if it was not self- 
evident and if it required an examination or argument to establish it. An error 
of law which is apparent on the face of the record can be corrected by a writ 
of certiorari but not an error of fact, howsoever grave it may appear to be.® 
The reason for the rule is that the Court issuing a writ of certiorari acts in a 
supervisory jurisdiction and not appellate jurisdiction. Accordingly, it cannot 
substitute its own decisions on the merits of the case or give direction to be 
complied with by the inferior court or tribunal.® 

3. Disregard of principles of natur-tl justice. — A writ of certiorari 
also lies against a couit or tribunal when it acts in violation of the principles 
of natural justice. Two principles of natural justice arc generally accepted— 
(I) the court ot tribunal should be free from bias and interest, and (2) audl 
alteram partem, /. e. the parties must be heard before the decision is given. 
The principle that the adjudicator should not have an interest or bias in the 
case, is that (a) no mao shall be a judge in his own cause ; and (b) justice 
should not be done but manifestly and undoubtedly seen to be done. The 
rcson for this rule is to enable the tribunal to act independently and impar- 
tially without any bias towards one side or the other. > 

The second principle is that the judicial or quasi-judicial body must give 
a reasonable opportunity to the parlies concerned presenting their case. Both 
the sides must have full and fair hearing and no man should be condemned 
unheard— is important rule of civilized justice. This principle infers many 

J. State otU. P. v. Mohd. Nooh, A. I. R 1958 S.C.86. 

2 Ebrabun Aboobakar v. CuUodian-General, A. 1. R. 1952 S. C. 319. 

3. Uari Vishnu v. Ahmad Ishaq ue, A. I. R. 1955 S. C. 213 ; Index Singh v. Chief Com- 
missioner, Punjab, A. I. R. !9o3 S. C. 1581. > 

4. A. 1. R. 1955 S. C. 213. 

5. S>ed Yakoob v. Radhakrisbnan. A. I. R. 1964 S. C. 477. 

6. Hail Vishnu v. Ahmad Ishaque, A. I. R- 1955 S. C. 233- See also Sjed Yakoob v. 

Radbakmhnan, A. 1. R. 1964 S. C. 477. 

7. A. P. S R. T. Corpn, v. Satya Nauyan Transports, A. I. R. 1963 S. C. 1303 ; Mineral 

Development Ltd v. State of Bihar. A. 1. R. t960 S. C. 1373- 



25]: 


THB STATE JUDICIARY 


311 


things : that the parties affected must be given sufficient opportunity to meet 
the case against them. 1 2 * 4 5 6 7 that the parties must be appraised of the evidence or 
any information on which the case against them is based and be given an 
opportunity to contradict these materials, 3 and that evidence must not be given 
behind the back of the other party but in their presence. 

Gut if a party docs not avail of himself that opportunity and fails to place 
bis case before the court or tribunal either personally or through lawyer, there 
would be no denial of justice and he is himself to blame if he allows the 
opportunity of being heard to slip away. 8 

When it will not lie ; — The writ of certiorari cannot be issued against a 
private body. Co-operative Electricity Supply Society Limited incorporated 
under the Co-operative Societies Act, is a private body and not a public body 
discharging public function. The writ-petition is, therefore, not maintainable 
against the private society. 4 

5. Quo Warranto.— The word ‘quo warranto ’ means 'what is your autho- 
rity.’ By this writ a holder of an office is called upon to show to the court 
under what authority he holds the office. The object of the writ of quo 
warranto is to prevent a person to hold an office which he is not legally entitled 
to hold. If the inquiry leads to the finding that the holders of the office has no 
valid title to it, the Court may pass an order preventing the holder to continue 
in office and may also declare the office vacant. If the holder of a public 
office was initially disqualified to hold that office, the writ of quo warranto 
would not be issued if at a subsequent stage that disqualification was removed 
and after the removal of the disqualification the incumbent concerned could 
have been appointed on the same post. The doctrine is that in cases where 
the initial disqualification is removed it would be open to the authorities 
concerned to appoint the same person immediately even if the court grams the 
writ of quo u arranto as desired by the petitioner. The general principle is that 
the court would not pass any writ or any decree which becomes futile. 8 

Who can apply.— A writ of quo warranto can be claimed by a person if he 
satisfies the Court that : — 

(1) the office in question is a public office, 3Dd 

(2) it is held by a person without legal authority. 0 

The writ of quo warranto is not issued in respect of an office of a private 
character. Thus in Jamalpur Arya Samaj Sabha v. Dr. D. Ram, 1 the High Court 
refused to issue a writ of quo warranto against the members of the working 
committee of the Bihar Ar>a Samaj Sabha, a private association. 

nn application for the writ of quo warranto challenging the legality of an 
appointment to an office of a public nature may lie at the instance of any 

1. Uopalan v Slate of Madras. A. I. R. 1930 S. C. 27 ; Sangrara Singh v. Election 

Tribunal, A, I. R. 1953 S. C. 425 

2. D. C. Mill 4 v. Commissioner of locoroe-tax. A. I. R. 1933 S. C.6J. 

i. Ram Narasan v. Dmapur Cantt. Hoard, A. I. R. 1938 S. C. 71. 

4. A. Rang* Reddy v. General Manager Coop. Electric Supply Society Ltd., A. I. R. 

1977 N. O. C- 2J2 (AnJhta Pradesh). 

5. Dr. Her Ram Kalia v. Himachal Pradesh University, Simla, A. 1. R. 1977 N. O. C. 

246 (Him. Pta.). 

6. University of Madras v. Go»ic4 Rao, A. I. R. I9oJ S. C. 431. 

7. A. 1. R- 1954 Pal. 297. 



312 


CONSTIIUUONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


private person, although he is not personally aggrieved or interested in the 
matter. It is not necessary that the petitioner for quo warranto must have tegai 
right in the office. Any member of public can challenge the right of a person 
to hold a public office In G. D. Karkare v. T. L. Siievde, 1 the appointment 
of Advocate-General of M. P. was challenged by a private individual who had 
no legal interest in that office. The Court issued a writ of quo waranto against 
the Advocate-General. 

A writ of quo warrantors never issued as a matter of course and it is 
always within the discretion of the court to decide after having considered the 
facts and circumstances of each case, whether the petitioner concerned is the 
person who could be entrusted with such a writ which, is always issued oniy in 
the interest of the public in general. The Court may refuse to grant a writ of 
quo warranto if it is vexatious or where the petitioner is guilty of laches, or 
where he has acquiesced or concurred in the very act against which he 
complains or where the motive of the relator is supicious.* Thus where the 
holder of an office has been continuing in office for a long time and there is 
no complaint against him the court refused the writ as it would have been 
vexatious. 3 

Extension of jurisdiction of High Court.— Under Article 230 Parliament 
can by law extend the jurisdiction of a High Court over any Union Territory. 
The Legislature of a State cannot also increase, restrict or abolish the juris- 
diction. 

SUBORDNIATE COURTS 

Articles 233 to 237.*— Jn every Slate there is a system of subordinate 
courts below the High Court. The Constitution secures the independence of 
subordinate Judiciary from the Executive. 

Art. 233 provides that the appointment, posting and promotion of District 
Judges shall be made by the Governor of the Slate in consultation with tho 
High Court. 

A person already in the service of the Union or of the State shall only be 
eligible to be appointed as a District Judge if he fulfils two conditions, namely, 
(1) be must be an advocate or a pleader for 7 years and (2) his name is recom- 
mended by the High Court for appointment (Article 233). It follows from 
this that a person can be appointed to the post of District Judge by the Gover- 
nor only in consultation with the High Court. 

In Chandra Mohan v. U. f’., 6 the validity of the U. P. Higher Judicial 
Service Rules was involved. Under these rules, the Governor appointed a 
Selection Committee for selecting candidates for the appointment of District 
Judges, but not in consultation with the High Court as provided by Art. 233 
(1). Tne Supreme Court declared the U. P. Higher Judicial Service Rules are 
unconstitutional, contravening the clear mandate ofCls. (1) and (2) of Art. 
233, and the appointments made under these Rules are therefore illegal. H 

t. A- 1. R. 1952 Nag. 330. 

2. Dr. Hel Ram Kalia v. Himachal Pradesh University. Sim la, A. 1. R. 1977 N. O. C. 

247 (Him. Pra.). 

3. Baij Nath v. Stale of U. P-, A. 1 R. 1965 All. 151. 

4. These Articles do not apply to the State of Jammu & Kashmir. 

5. A. I. R. 1966 S. C. 1987. See also Assam v. Rauga Mohammad, A. I. R. 19o7 S. C. 

903. 



25] 


TUB STATE JUDICIARY 


313 


also held that the Rules empowering the Governor to appoint District Judges 
from ‘'judicial officers” are unconstitutional because the word “the service” 
in Art. 233 (2) can only mean the judicial service and not other services. 
This is a mandatory provision and not directory. The Court said that the 
object of consultation is apparent. The High Court is expected to know better 
than the Governor the suitability of candidates to be appointed as a District 
Judge. 

To remove the difficulties created by this decision, the Constitution was 
amended by the Constitution (20th Amendment) Act, 1966. The amendment 
added a new Art, 233-A to the Constitution which retrospectively validated all 
appointments and judgments delivered by certain District Judges. 

The initial appointment of District Judges under Art. 233 is within the 
exclusive jurisdiction of the Government after consultation with the High 
Court. The Governor is not bound to act on the advice of the High Court. 
The High Court recommends the names of the persons for appointment, but 
it is not obligatory on the Governor to accept the recommendation. Nor is 
the Government bound to give reasons for not accepting the recommendations 
of the High Court. 1 

Article 233 vests the control over district and subordinate courts in the 
High Courts. In Assam v. Ranga Mohammad. 2 the Supre me Court held that the 
transfer of District Judge is a matter included in ‘control’ exercisable by High 
Court under Art. 235 and the State Government has no authority in the matter. 
Under Art. 233 the Governor is only concerned with appointment, promotion 
and posting to the cadre of District Judges but not with the transfer of District 
Judges already appointed or promoted and posted to the cadre. In State of 
W.B. v. Nripendra Nath, 9 the Supreme Court held that the control vested ia the 
High Court under Art. 235 includes disciplinary jurisdiction also. The High 
Court can therefore hold inquiries and impose punishment other than dismissal 
or removal which falls under the purview of the Governor. The High Court 
alone can institute a disciplinary proceeding against a District Judge and not 
the Government. In State of Orissa v. Sudhansu Shekhar * it has been held 
that persons holding judicial posts cannot be appointed to administrative posts 
without the consent of the High Court. 

In Punjab and Haryana High Court v. State of Haryana* the Supreme Court 
declared Rule 10 of the Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules which conferred 
on the Governor the power to confirm a District Judge as unconstitutional. 

It was held that the confirmation of a District Judge is within the control of 
the High Court. The initial appointment as well as promotions are with the 
Governor. After they are appointed and promoted to be District Judges the 
entire control is vested in the High Court. The power of the Government 
ceases after appointment and promotion. Confirmation of an officer on 
successful completion of his period of probation is neither a fresh appoint- 
ment nor completion of appointment. 

Appointments of persons other than District Judges to the judicial 
service of a Stale shall be made by the Governor of the Slate in accordance 

1. (.j, s. Jain v. State of Haryana, A. I. R. 1977 S. C. 276. 

2. A. I. R. 1967 S. C. 90J. 

3. AIR 1966 SC 447 • State of Orissa v. Sudhansu Shekhar, AIR 1968 SC 647. 

4. AIR 1968 SC 647. 

5. AIR 1975 SC 613 

Const. 40 



314 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF 1NUIA Cliap. 


with the rules made by him ia that behalf ia consultation with the State Public 
Service Commission and with the High Court of the State (.Art. 234). 

The control over District Courts and subordinate courts thereto is vested 
in the High Courts by Article 23S including the posting and promotion and 
the grant of leave to officers of the State Judicial Services inforior to the post 
of District Judge. 

In Shanuhtr Singh v. Stare of Punjab, 1 2 the Supreme Court held that the 
High Court under Article 235 is vested with the control of subordinate judi- 
ciary. The members of the subordinate judiciary are not only under the con- 
trol of the High Court but are also under the care and custody of the High 
Court. The request by the High Court to have the enquiry for charges of 
misconduct against the member of the subordinate judicial service through the 
Director of Vigilance was an act of self-abnegation. The High Court should 
have conducted the inquiry preferably through District Judges. The members 
of the subordinate judiciary look up to the High Court not only for discipline 
but also for dignity. The High Court acted in total disregard of Article 235 
by asking the Government to enquire through the Director of Vigilance. 

In Stale of Gujarat v. Ramesh Chandra ,* it has been held that the Regis- 
trar of the Court of Small Causes is a person holding a civil judicial post 
inferior to the post of District Judge and is in judicial service. He exercises 
judicial powers, bears suits, passes decrees and an appeal is preferred from a 
decree of the Registrar. Consequently, the Registrar is under the disciplinary 
jurisdiction of the High Court. The High Court was therefore in error in 
holding that it bad no power to order disciplinary proceedings. The question 
of appointing authority is irrelevant in regard to the disciplinary jurisdiction 
or the High Court. 

At present, the State Government exercises the administrative control 
over the District and Subordinate Magistrates. However, Article 237 provide* 
that the Governor may by public notification direct tbat any of the above- 
mentioned provisions relating to any class of persons appointed to the State 
Judicial Service will apply with such exceptions and modifications as he may 
deem fit. This Article thus makes possible for the separation of the Executive 
from tbe Judiciary as contemplated by Article 50 of the Directive Principles of 
the State Policy. Under the Article the Governor may transfer the control 
over the subordinate courts to the High Courts. The Law Commission has also 
suggested to strengthen the control of -the High Court over the District Judges 
and the subordinate judiciary in a State. This is important to ensure the 
independence of the subordinate judiciary. 

High Courts for Union Territories. — Under Article 241 Parliament is 
empowered to constitute a High Court for a Union Territory or declare any 
court in any such territory to be a High Court for all or any of the purposes 
of this Constitution. The provision relating to the High Courts in the Slates 
shall apply to the High Courts for Union Territories with such modifications 
or exceptions as may be provided by Parliament by law. According to clause 
(3) every High Court exercising jurisdiction immediately before the commence- 
ment of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, in relation to any 
Union Territory shall continue to exercise such jurisdiction until Parliament 
by law excludes such jurisdiction. 


1. AIR 1974 SC 2192. 

2. AIR 1977 SC t6t9. 



26 


Priuile^es of tlxe Legislature 
(Art. 105 and Art. 194) 

Parliamentary Privilege is defined by Sir T. F. May as : 

“Some of the peculiar rights enjoyed by each House collectively as a 
constituent part of the Parliament and by the members of each 
House individually, without which they could not discharge their 
functions, and which exceed those possessed by other bodies or 
individuals.'* ‘ 

The constitutional provisions regarding privileges of the State Legis- 
latures and Parliament are indentical. Articles 105 and 194 provide for 
privileges of the Legislature in India. While Article 105 deals with Parlia- 
ment. Article 194 deals with State Legislatures. The Constitution expressly 
mentions two privileges (a) freedom of speech in the Legislature and (b) right 
of publication of proceedings. Prior to the 4*lth Amendment with regard to 
other privileges Article 105 (3) provided that the powers, privileges and immu- 
nities of each House, until they are defined by the Parliament shall be those of 
the House of Commons in England. No such law defining parliamentary 
privileges has been passed by Parliament. After the 44th Amendment Act, Art. 
105 provides that in other respects the powers, privileges and immunities of 
each House of Parliament until defined by Parliament shall be those of that 
House and of its members and committees immediately before the coming into 
force of the Constitution, (44th Amendment Act) 1978’. Thus the 44th Amend- 
ment completely omits any reference to the British House of Commons. 

Freedom of Speech.— In England this privilege of the House of Commons 
is well established. It has been given statutory recognition by Bill of Rights in 
1689 which says that the freedom of speech or debates in Parliament ought 
not be impeached or questioned in any court or place out of Parliament. 

The Indian Constitution expressly guarantees this privilege in Article 105 
which says— 

“there shall be freedom of speech in Parliament and that no member 
of Parliament shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in 
respect of anything said or any voie given by him in Parliament 
or any Committee thereof.” 

The Article thus gives absolute immunity f rom courts for anything 
said within the four walls of the House during the course of proceedings of 
the House, or its Committees. So what is protected is the speech within the 
House. Outside the House a member of House is as good as any other citizen 
and if a member repeats or publishes a defamatory speech made by him 
within the House, he does so on his own responsibility and risk and will be 
held liable for prosecution under section 500 of the Indian Penal Code.* 


1. May— Pari. amentary Practice, 16ib Edn., Cb. III, p. 42. 

2. Jaiish Chandra v. Hart Sadan. A. I. R. 1961 S. C. 613. 



3i4 CoNsmoncNAC t*w of isuIa Chap. 

with the rules made by him ia that behalf in consultation with the State Public 
Service Commission and with the High Court of the State (Art. 254). 

The control over District Courts and subordinate courts thereto is vested 
in the High Courts by Article 235 including the posting and promotion and 
the grant of leave to officers of the State Judicial Services inforior to the post 
of District Judge. 

In Skamsher Singh v. State of Punjab, 1 2 the Supreme Court held that the 
High Court under Article 235 is vested with the control of subordinate judi- 
ciary. The members of the subordinate judiciary are not only under the con- 
trol of the High Court but arc also under the care and custody of the High 
Court. The request by the High Court to have the enquiry for charges of 
misconduct against the member of the subordinate judicial service through the 
Director of Vigilance was an act of self-abnegation. The High Court should 
have conducted the inquiry preferably through District Judges. The members 
of the subordinate judiciary look up to the High Court not only for discipline 
but also for dignity. The High Court acted in total disregard of Article 235 
by asking the Government to enquire through the Director of Vigilance. 

Ia State of Gujarat r. Ramesh Chandra * it has been held that the Regis- 
trar of the Court of Small Causes is a person holding a civil judicial post 
inferior to the post of District Judge and is in judicial service. He exercises 
judicial powers, bears suits, passes decrees and an appeal is preferred from a 
decree of the Registrar. Consequently, the Registrar is under the disciplinary 
jurisdiction of the High Court. The High Court was therefore in error in 
holding that it had no power to order disciplinary proceedings. The question 
of appointing authority is irrelevant in regard to the disciplinary jurisdiction 
of the High Court. 

At present, the Slate Government exercises the administrative control 
over the District and Subordinate Magistrates. However, Article 237 provides 
that the Governor may by public notification direct that any of the above- 
mentioned provisions relating to any class of persons appointed io the State 
Judicial Service will apply with such exceptions and modifications as he may 
deem fit. This Article thus makes possible for the separation of the Executive 
from tbe Judiciary as contemplated by Article 50 of ihn Directive Principles of 
the State Policy. Under the Article the Governor may transfer tbe control 
over the subordinate courts to the High Courts. The I» a w Commission has also 
suggested to strengthen the control of -the High Court over the District Judges 
and the subordinate judiciary in a State. This is important to ensure the 
independence of the subordinate judiciary. 

High Courts for Union Territories.— Under Article 241 Parliament is 
empowered to constitute a High Court for a Union Territory or declare any 
court in any such territory to be a High Court for all or any of the purposes 
of this Constitution. The provision relating to the High Courts in the Slates 
shall apply to the High Courts for Union Territories with such modifications 
or exceplionsas may be provided by Parliament by Jaw. According to clause 
(3) every High Court exercising jurisdiction immediately before the commence- 
ment of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, in relation to any 
Union Territory shall continue to exercise such jurisdiction until Parliament 
by law excludes such jurisdiction. 


1. AIR 1974 SC 2192. 

2. AIR 1977 SC 1619. 



26] 


PRIVILEGES OF THE LEGISLATURE 


317 


each House of Par lia meat, a ad of the members and the Committees of each 
House, shall be those of that House, aDd of its members and committees at the 
commencement of clause (3) of the Constitution (42Dd Amendment) Act, 1976/ 
“and as may be evolved by such House of Parliament from time to time". 

Prior to this amendment, the privileges were to be those which were 
enjoyed by the members of the House of Commons in England until defined by 
Parliament by law. Thus under the amended clause (3) the privileges 
could be classified into two categories : — (1) Privileges enjoyed by the 
members of Parliament at the commencement of (42 Amendment) Act, 
1976. Thus the amended clause (3) retained all the existing privileges. 
(2) Privileges which may be evolved by the House of Parliament from 
time to time. This meant that clause (3) deprived Parliament of the power to 
define Parliamentary privileges by law. A law defining Parliamen tary privileges 
could be challenged on the ground that they were inconsistent with the provi- 
sions of the Constitution. The amendment vested exclusive power in each 
House of Parliament to evolve privileges from time to time. Jt meant that the 
privileges would be established, practised and precedents which would be trans- 
formed into convention. 

The (44th Amendment) Act, 1978. — The 42nd Amendment had partially dropped 
the reference to the House of Commons regarding the privileges of Legislatures. 
The 44th Amendment repeals the amendments made by the (42nd Amendment) 
Act and thus restores the original Articles 105 (3) and 194 (3) of the Constitu- 
tion. Further, it amends these articles so as to omit completely any reference 
to the House of Commons i a future. For this purpose, t be amendment subs- 
titutes the words “shall be those of that House and its members and Committees 
immediately before the coming into force of the Constitution ( 44th Amendment) Act, 
1978” for the words “shall be those of the House of Commons of the Parlia- 
ment of the United Kingdom, and of its members and Committees, at the 
commencement of this Constitution” in clause (3) of Art. 105. 

The 44th Amendment, like the 42nd Amendment, thus retains all the 
existing privileges which were enjoyed by the Legislatures in India. As regards 
new privileges it restores the original position and provides that they can be 
defined by a parliamentary law. 

A similar change has been made in clause (3) of Article 194 which relates 
to privileges of the State Legislature. This means that the privileges of each 
House of Parliament or State Legislatures will now be the same as existed 
immediately before the coming into force of the (44th Amcdmcnt) Act, 1978. 

(I) Freedom from Arrest. — This privilege is also well established in 
England. A member of Parliament cannot be arrested or imprisoned during 
a session of Parliament and for 40 days before and 40 days after the session. 

If a member is arrested in those conditions he should be released so that he 
might be free to attend Parliament. This privilege is available against arrest 
and imprisonment on a criminal charge, or for Contempt of Court 4 or from 
preventive detention. 1 * 3 If a member of a House commits a crime he will be 


1 Mav- Parliamentary Practice (15th Ed., p. 82) ; Ansumah Majumdar v. State of W est 

' Beneal. A 1952 Cat- 632 ; V. K- Copalan v. State of Madras, A.I.R. 1943 Cat. 27. 

Ansumali Majumdar v. State of West Bengal, A. I. R. 1952 Cal- 6J2. 



316 


CONSTItUTlONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap 


It is to be noted that CL (1) of Article 105 is expressly made “Subject 
to the provisions of this Constitution and to the rules and Standing Orders 
regulating the procedure of Parliament.” One of such a constitutional restric- 
tion of freedom of speech is imposed by Article 121. Article 121 prohibits 
any discussion in Parliament with respect to the conduct of a Judge of the 
Supreme Court or a High Court in discharge of his duties, except when a 
motion to present an address to the President for his removal is under consi- 
dera'ion of the House. 

The freedom of speech is also subject to the rules of procedure of a 
House made under Article 203. Under rules 349 to 356 of the Lok Sabha 
use of unparliamentary language or unparliamentary conduct of a member is 
prohibited. 

Right of Publication of Its Proceedings. — Article 105 (2) expressly provides 
that no person is to be liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of 
publication of any report, paper, votes or proceedings ty or under the authority 
of a House. The protection under this Article does not extend to publication 
made by a private person without the authority of a House. ' In SurenJra v. 
Nebrakrishna* an editor of a newspaper was held guilty of committing 
Contempt of Court for publishing a statement, made in the House amounting 
to contempt of the High Court, without the authority of the House. It was 
held that ihere were many advantages to the public, which has the deepest 
interest in knowing what passes in Parliament, if a true report of parliamentary 
proceedings are published in a newspaper 8 Accordingly, the Parliamentary 
Proceedings (Protection of a Publication) Act, 1956 was passed which provided 
that no person shall be liable to any proceedings civil or crimiaal— in any 
court in respect of the publication of substantially true report of the pro- 
ceedings of either House of Parliament, unless it is proved that the publication 
of such proceeding expressly ordered to be expuaged by the Speaker. 1 2 3 4 This 
Act was repealed by the Congress Government during 1975 Emergency. The 
Janata Government has now repealed the Amending Act of 1976 and restored 
the freedom of the Press to publish true reports of Parliamentary proceedings 
without prior permission of the Legislature. 

The 44th Amendment Act.— This Amendment has now put this immunity 
on a very solid footing. This immunity uptil now, has been regulated by a 
Parliamentary law. The Amendment, by incorporaling Art. 36 1 A into the 
Constitution, gives it a constitutional protection. It has added a new Art. 361A 
which provides that no person shall be liable to any civil or criminal proceed- 
ings in any court in respect of the publication in a newspaper of a substantially . 
true report of the proceedings of the either Houses of Parliament, or of a State 
Legislature, unless the publication is proved to have been made with malice. 
This immunity will also apply to broadcast by means of wireless. This will, 
however, not apply to the publication of any report of a secret sitting 
of a House. 

Other Privileges . — The Constitution ( 42nd Amendment) Act, 1976, 
amended clause (3) of Art. 105 of the Constitution. The amended clause 
provided that in other respects the powers, privileges and immunities of 

1. In re under Article 143, A. I. R. 1965 S. C. 745 

2. A I. R. 1958 Orissa 168— See the Law in England— Stockdale v. Hansard. (18591 8 L J. 

Q B 294. 

3. This is in line with the decision in Wason v Walter, (1868) 4 1 . R. Q. B. 73, 

4. M. S. M. Sharaia v. Sri Krishna Sir.ha, A. I. R. 19J9S. C. 39 S. 



26] 


FKIViLXCLS OP 1UB U.OtSLAHJl>B 


319 


lo S. M. Sharma v. Sri Krishna Sinha, 1 the Supreme Court held 
that -“the validity of-lhc.nroca*fm <™ Legislature of a Sute cannot 

v I j lure laid down by law 

CM i 


CM 

o 

CM 

cr>. 


no-. 


eM 


CM 


en 

CM 



co : 

1M 

- T "~ 

CM 

CM 

CM 


>-o ' 


CM 


in 


O' 1 




CO 

MARCH 

m 

CM 

APRIL 

IM 

> i 

5 T “ 


antempt.— The House of 
:mbcr or stranger— for 
wer is truly described as 
is used by the House 
of the question whether 
t cannot question the 
Ion tempt of Court’ is of 
Jn which obstructs or 
ts or interfers with any 
luties or which has a 
Us, may be treated as a 
ence. The House can 
iSon held guilty of com- 
3 its validity. However, 
nd is proved unlawful 


‘contempt’ or ‘breach of 
ora the House, or may 
>er from the House is 
does not disqualify him 
scently, the Lok Sabha 
ster Mrs. Indira Gandhi 
House is prorogued for 
she was Prime Minister, 
te secretary Mr, R. K. 

Mr. D. Sen. The Lok 
tat Mrs. Indira Gandhi 
: Parliament from know- 
isly installing imported 
n indegeneous small car. 
the House by causing 
i of false cases against 
□rination She commit- 
House by her refusal to 
1 by casting aspersions 


(a) guarantees freedom 
this right is subject to 



318 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


arrested like an ordinary person. In India also it has been held that the 
privilege does not extend to arrest or imprisonment On a criminal charge or for 
detention under Preventive Detention Act.* 

In K. Anandan Nambiar v. Chief Secretary, Government of Madras, 1 2 3 the 
petitioners, who were members of Parliament, were detained under Defence of 
India Rules, 1962. They challenged the order of detention on the ground 
that a legislator can be detained so as to prevent him from exercising his cons- 
titutional tights as legislator while the legislative chamber to which he belongs 
is in session. The Court held that if a person is detained under a valid deten- 
tion order, a member can claim no special status higher than that of an ordi- 
nary citizen and that he is as much liable to be arrested and detained under it as 
any other citizea. If an order of detention validly prevents a member from 
attending a session of Parliament, no occasion would arise for the exercise by 
him of the right of freedom of speech. 

(2) Rights (o exclude strangers from its proceedings and hold secret 
sessions — This right has been used by the Houses of England to go into secret 
sessions to discuss some important matters. The House of Parliament in India 
enjoy a similar power 8 However, in modern times secret sessions are held 
only on exceptional occasions because the voters must be kept informed of 
what their representatives are doing in the Legislature. 

(3) Right to prohibit the publication of its Reports and Proceedings.— In 
England, the House of Commons has the tight to prohibit the publication of 
its report, debates or other proceedings. In the famous Searchlight case, 4 * 
the question was whether ibe publication by a newspaper of those parts of the 
speech of a member in the House ordered to be expunged by the Speaker 
constituted breach of privilege of the House. The Supreme Court held that 
the publication of expunged portion of speech constituted a breach of the 
privilege of the House. The effect in law of the order of the Speaker to expunge 
a portion of the speech of a member may be as if that portion has not been 
spoken. In India, the House of Parliament have definitely the power to pro- 
hibit the publication of proceedings. 

(4) Right (o regulate Internal Proceedings.— The House has an exclusive 
right to regulate its own internal proceedings and to adjudicate upon such 
matters. The couits of ordinary jurisdiction will not interfere with what takes 
place inside the House. In Bradlaugli v. Gosseff Bradlaugh was prevented to 
enter Ibe House by the order of the House of Commons. The plaintiff asked the 
court to declare that the order of the House was invalid. The court held 
that the House of Commons was not subject to the control of court in matters 
relating to its own internal proceedings ; the House of Commons has exclusive 
right of being the exclusive judge of the legality of its own proceedings. No 
court of law can interfere in the right of the House to regulate its internal 
affairs. 

In India* Article 122 says that the validity of the proceeding? in Parlia- 
ment cannot be called in question in a court of law on the ground of any 
alleged irregularity of procedure. 

1. Lok Sabha Rules 387 ; Smt. Indira Gandhi v. Raj Narain, A. I. R. 1975 S. C. 2299. 

2. A. I R. 1966 S. C. 657 ; Smt. Indira Gandhi v Raj Narain, A. I. R. 1975 S. C. 2299. 

3. M. S. M. Sharma v. Sri Krishna Sioha, A. I. R. 1159 S. C. 395. 

4. A I. R. 1959 S C. 395. 

5 (1824) 12 Q. B. D. 271, followed in the Kine v. S. G. Campbell. (1936) I K B. 594. 



261 PRIVILEGES OP TUB LEGISLATURE 32l 

prohibits any discussion in a State Legislature with respect to the conduct of 
any Judge or the Supreme Court or High Court in discharge of his duties. 

Article 194 (3) is in two parts The first part empowers the Legislatures 
to define by law their own powers, privileges and immunities. If such a law 
is passed under Article 194 (3) it will be subject to Article 13 (2) and the 
court would be competent to examine its validity. If such 3 law gives any 
power to the House which is inconsistent with fundamental rights it would 
be declared invalid under Article 13. The second part of Article 194 (3) says 
that until defined by any law made by the Legislature the powers, privileges and 
immunities shall be those of the House of Commons in England at the com- 
mencement of the Constitution. 

Article 194 (3) was amended by the Constitution ( 42nd Amendment ) 
Act, 1976, which provided that other privileges, powers and immunities of 
each House of State Legislature shall be those which were in existence at the 
commencement of the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 and those 
which may be evolved by the Houses from time to time. The Legislature need 
not pass a law for defioiog parlimentary privileges. They will be established 
by an evolutionary process. The Amendment partially dropped the reference to 
the House of Commons regarding the privileges of Legislatures. Article 194 (3) 
has again been amended by the Constitution ( 44th Amendment) Act, 1978. The 
44th Amendment omits completely any reference to the British House of Com- 
mons. The effect of these amendments is that the privileges of the Legislature in 
India shall now be those which existed before the coming into force of the 
(44th Amendment Act, 1978). 

The powers that the House can claim must be shown to have subsisted 
in the House of Commons on the 26th January, 1930, and it should be further 
shown that such claim was recognised by the English Courts Secondly, not 
all the powers and privileges which belonged to the House of Commons on 
26th January, 1950, can only be claimed by the State Legislature under Article 
194 (3). 

It caDnot be disputed that in matters of privileges the House is the sole 
and exclusive Judge provided such privilege can be found in Article 194 (3). 
The question whether a privilege as claimed by the House is provided by 
Article 194 (3) or not is a matter for the Court to decide. In other words, the 
determination of nature and scope of Article 194 (3) lies with the court. In 
support of the above view, the court drew a distinction between British and 
Indian Parliament. The former is sovereign aDd the latter is subject to the 
provisions of the Constitution. Ours being a federal Constitution, the inter- 
pretation of the Constitution, is judicial function, including the interpretation of 
the privileges of the Legislature. The question whether the privileges and im- 
munities enjoyed by Legislature under the latter part of Article 194 (3) are 
subject to the provisions of Part III of the Constitution was not discussed by 
the court in general terms The Supreme Court has, however, made a simple 
observation that such privileges are necessarily subject to Articles 21 aad 22 of 
the Constitution. 


Const. 41 



320 CONSTlIUJJONAtLAW Of INDIA [Chap. 

105 is an independent right and is not subject to restrictions under clause (2) 
of Article 19 (1). Thus it is dear that the freedom of speech under Article 105 
is different from the freedom of speech under Article 19 which is subject to 
restrictions. 

Privileges and the Court. — This matter came up for consideration before 
the Supreme Court in the famous advisory opinion of In re under Article 143. 1 
In this case one Keshava Singh who was not a member of the U. P. 
Assembly, was held guilty of contempt of the House and was 
sentenced to imprisonment for 7 days. On behalf of Keshava Singh, Mr. 
Soloman, his advocate, moved an habeas corpus petition alleging - that his 
detention was illegal and ma'a fide. The petition was heard by the Bench of 
two Judges of the Allahabad High Court which granted bail to Keshava Singh 
and he was released 

The Assembly then passed a resolution that the two Judges, Keshava 
Singh and his advocate Soloman, had committed contempt of the House and 
directed that Keshava Singh be immediately taken into custody and the two 
Judges and the advocate be brought into custody before the House. 

Ou this, the two judges and the advocate separately moved the petition 
under Article 226 in the High Court contending that the resolution amounted 
to Contempt of Court and that it be set aside and its implementation be stayed 
by interim order. The petition was heard by tbe Full Bench which passed an 
interim order directing the stay of implementation of the Resolution of 
Assembly. At this stage the President of ludia referred the matter to the 
Supreme Court under Article 143 Tor its advisory opmion. 

The main question involved in this controversy was— whether the Legis- 
lature is tbe sole and exclusive judge of its privileges and whether it is com- 
petent to pumsb a person for its contempt taking phee outside the Legislature ? 
Wether the High Court who entertained a petition of habeas corpus challeng- 
ing the validity of tbe detention of a person sentenced by the Assembly under 
a general or unspeaking warrant had committed a contempt of the Legislature ? 

The Supreme Court by a majority of 6 to l held that the Courts in India 
can examine into the validity of a detention or a person sentenced by the 
Assembly under a general or unspeaking warrant. As regards the contention 
of the Assembly that the Courts in England cannot examine the validity of a 
general warrant issued by the House of Commons, the Court held that such a 
right is not conferred on a Legislature in India. The House of Commons is 
the highest Court in England and as a result a general warrant issued by it is 
not subject to scrutiny by other courts. In India, Legislatures never discharged 
any judicial functions aad their historical and constitutional background does 
not support the claim to be regarded as courts of record. Hence, the very 
basis on which the English courts treat a general warrant issued by the House 
of Commons is absent in India. 

In construing the powers and privileges under Article 194 (3), other 
provisions of the Constitution must also be considered harmoniously. Article 
226 confers wide power on High Courts to issue writ of habeas corpus against 
any authority which according to Article 12 includes the Legislature and so the 
High Court can exercise its power even against the Legislature. Article 211 


I. AIR 1965 SC 745 



26 ) 


PRIVILEGES OP TUB LEGISLATURE 


321 


prohibits any discussion in a State Legislature with respect to the conduct of 
any Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court in discharge of his duties. 

Article 194 (3) is in two parts. The first part empowers the Legislatures 
to define by law their oivo powers, privileges and immunities, if such a law 
is passed under Article 194 (3) it will be subject to Article 13 (2) and the 
court would be competent to examine its validity. If such a law gives any 
power to the House which is inconsistent with fundamental rights it would 
be declared invalid under Article 13. The second part of Article 194 (3) says 
that until defined by any law made by the Legislature the powers, privileges and 
immunities shall be those of the House of Commons in England at the com- 
mencement of the Constitution. 

Article 194 (3) was amended by the Constitution (42nd Amendment) 
Act, 1976, which provided that other privileges, powers and immunities of 
each House of State Legislature shall be those which were in existence at the 
commencement of the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 and those 
which may be evolved by the Houses from time to time. The Legislature need 
not pass a law for defining parlimentary privileges. They will be established 
by an evolutionary process. The Amendment partially dropped the reference to 
the House of Commons regarding the privileges of Legislatures. Article 194 (3) 
has again been amended by the Constitution (44th Amendment) Act, 1978 . The 
44 ih Amendment omits completely any reference to the British House of Com- 
mons. The effect of these amendments is that the privileges of the Legislature in 
India shall now be those which existed before the coming into force of the 
(44ih Amendment Act, 1978). 

The powers that the House can claim must be shown to have subsisted 
in the House of Commons on the 26th January, 1930, and it should be further 
shown that such claim was recognised by the English Courts Secondly, not 
all the powers and privileges which belonged to the House of Commoos od 
26th January, 1950, can only be claimed by the State Legislature under Article 
194 (3). 

It cannot be disputed that in matters of privileges the House is the sole 
and exclusive Judge provided such privilege can be found in Article 194 (3). 
The question whether a privilege as claimed by the House is provided by 
Article 194 (3) or not is a matter for the Court to decide. In other words, the 
determination of nature and scope of Article 194 (3) lies with the court. In 
support of the above view, the court drew a distinction between British and 
Indian Parliament. The former is sovereign and the latter is subject to the 
provisions of the Constitution. Ours beiog a federal Constitution, the inter- 
pretation of the Constitution, is judicial function, including the interpretation of 
the privileges of the Legislature. The question whether the privileges and im- 
munities enjoyed by Legislature under the latter part of Article 194 (3) are 
subject to the provisions of Part 111 of the Constitution was not discussed by 
the court in general terms The Supreme Court has, however, made a simple 
observation that such privileges are necessarily subject to Articles 21 and 22 of 
the Constitution. 


Const. 41 



26] 


fKIVILtGtS OP TUB LEOISLATUh'E 


321 


prohibits any discussion in a State Legislature with respect to the cooduct of 
any Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court ia discharge of his duties. 

Article 194 (3) is in two parts. The first part empowers the Legislatures 
to define by law their own powers, privileges and immunities. If such a law 
is passed under Article 194 (3) it will be subject to Article 13 (2) and the 
court would be competent to examine its validity. If such a law gives any 
power to the House which is inconsistent with fundamental rights it would 
be declared invalid under Article 13. The second part of Article 194 (3) says 
that until defined by any law made by tbc Legislature the powers, privileges and 
immunities shall be those of the House of Commons in England at the com- 
mencement of the Constitution. 

Article 194 (3) was amended by the Constitution ( 42nd Amendment) 
Act, 1976, which provided that other privileges, powers and immunities of 
each House of State Legislature shall be those which were in existence at the 
commencement of the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 and those 
which may be evolved by the Houses from time to time. The Legislature need 
not pass a law for defining parlimentary privileges. They will be established 
by an evolutionary process. The Amendment partially dropped the reference to 
the House of Commons regarding the privileges of Legislatures. Article 194 (3) 
has again been amended by the Constitution {44th Amendment) Act, 1978. The 
44th Amendment omits completely any reference to the British House of Com- 
mons. The effect of these amendments is that the privileges of the Legislature in 
India shall now be those which existed before the coining into force of the 
(44th Amendment Act, 1978). 

The powers that the House can claim must be shown to have subsisted 
in the House of Commons on the 26th January, 1950, and it should be further 
shown that such claim was recognised by the English Courts Secondly, not 
all the powers and privileges which belonged to the House or Commons on 
26th January, 1950, can only be claimed by the State Legislature under Article 
194 (3). 

It cannot be disputed that in matters of privileges the House is the sole 
and exclusive Judge provided such privilege can be found in Article 194 (3). 
The question whether a privilege as claimed by tbc House is provided by 
Article 194 (3) or not is a matter for the Court to decide. In other words, the 
determination of nature and scope of Article 194 (3) lies with the court. In 
support or the above view, the court drew a distinction between British and 
Indian Parliament. The former is sovereign and the latter is subject to the 
provisions of the Constitution. Ours being a federal Constitution, the inter- 
pretation of the Constitution, is judicial function, including the interpretation of 
the privileges of the Legislature. The question whether the privileges and im- 
munities enjojed by Legislature under the latter part of Article 194 (3) are 
subject to the provisions of Part III of the Constitution was not discussed by 
the court in general terms The Supreme Court has, however, made a simple 
observation that such privileges are necessarily subject to Articles 21 and 22 of 
the Constitution. 


Const. 41 



27 


Relations Between "tine Union 
and the States (Arts. 243 to 293 

Introduction. — “The distribution of powers is an essential feature of fede- 
ralism. The object for which a federal State is formed involves a division of 

authority between the national Government and the separate States The 

tendency of federalism to limit on every side the action of the Government and 
to split up the strength of the State among co-ordinate and indepenent autho- 
rities is specially noticeable, because it forms the essential distinction between a 

federal system and a unitary system of Government”, 1 2 3 4 “A federal 

Constitution establishes the dual polity with the Union at the Centre and the 
States at a periphery, each endowed with sovereign powers to be exercised in 

the field assigned to them respectively by the Constitution” “The one is 

not subordinate to the other in its own field, the authority of one is co-ordinate 
with that of the other”. In fact, the basic principle, of federalism is that the 
legislative, executive and financial authority is divided between the Centre and 
States not by any law passed by the Centre but by Constitution itself. This 
is wbat Indian Constitution does. 

A. LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS 

The Constitution of lodia makes two-fold distribution of legislative 
powers 

(1) with respect to territory ; 

(2) with respect to subject-matter. 

Territorial Jurisdiction.— As regards teiiitory. Article 245 (1) provides 
that subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Pailumcnt may make laws 
for the whole or any part of the territory of India. According to clause (2) of 
Article 245 a law made by Parliament shall not be deemed to be invalid on the 
ground that it has extra-territorial operation, i.e., lakes effect outside the 
territory of India. In A. II. Wadia v. Income-tax Commissioner , Bombay , z the 
Supreme Court held : 

“In the case of a sovereign Legislature question of extra-territoriality of 
any enactment can never be raised in the municipal court as a 
ground for challenging its validity. The legislation may offend the 
rules of international law, may not be recognised by foreign 
courts, or there may be practical difficulties in enforcing them but 
there are questions of policy with which the domestic tribunals are 
not concerned " 

Theory of Territorial Nexus.— The Legislature of a State may make laws 
for the whole or any part of the State.® This means that State Laws would 
be void if it has extra-territorial operation, i. e. lakes effect outside the State.* 


1. A. V. Dicey— The Law of the Constitution, 10th Edition, 1959, pp. ljj. j jj. 

2. AIR 1949 F. C. 18. 

3. Article 245(1) 

4. Kocbuni v. Stale of Madras, AIR 1960 SC 1080 _ 



1-CLATIONS BBT WEEK TUB UNION AND TUB STATE 3 


However, there is one exception to this general rule. A State law of extra-terri- 
torial operation will be valid if there is sufficient nexus between the object and 
the State. 


In Wallace v. Income-tax Commissioner, Bombay,' a company which was 
registered in England was a partner in a firm in India. The Indian Income-tax 
Authorities sought to tax the entire income made by the company. The Priw 
Council applied the doctrine of territorial nexus and held the levy ortax salid 
It said, the derivation from British India of major part or its income for a vear 
cave to a company for that year sufficient territorial connection to justify its 
being treated as at home in India for all purposes or tax on its income for that 
year from whatever source income may be derived. 

In State of Bombay v. R. M. D. C.,* ‘be Bombay State levied a tax on 
lotteries and prize competitions. The tax was extended to a newspaper primed 
and published in Bangalore but had wide circulation in Bombay. The rcsoon. 
dent conducted the prize competitions through this paper. The court held that 
there existed a sufficient territorial nexus to enable the Bombay State to tax the 
newspaper. If theic is sufficient nexus between the person sought to be charged 
and the State seeking to lax him. ‘be ‘axing statute would be upheld. But the 
connection between the State and the subject-matter of law must be real and 
not illuso.y and the liability sought to be imposed must be pertinent to . ha t 
connection. Whether there is sufficient connection is a question of fact and 

55 be determined by courts in each case accordingly. and 

In Tata Iron and Steel Company v. State of Bihar* the Supreme Court 
applied the theory of territorial nexus to sale-tax laws. m 

Legislative power is Plenary.— The power of the Legislature under Article 
245 to enact laws is a plenary power subject only to its legislative compete** 

and other constitutional limitations. The power of the Legislature to pass a 

“ oostulates the power to pass it prospectively as well as retrospectively. Th 0 
Legislature has power to alter the existing laws retrospectively. It is within 
scope of the legislative competence of the Legislature. The power to validate a 
law P retrospectively is. subject to other constitutional limitation, an ancilla™ 
power to legislate on the pari.culnr subject.* 1 

Distribution of Legislative Po»eB.-Ai h« been pointed out ante out- 
a federal system postulates a distribution of powers between the Centre 

and States The nature of distribution varies according to the local an! 

Shical background in each country. In America the sovereign States which 

, keen M federate, did not like complete subordination to the Central 
S lit hence they believed n entrusting subjects of common interest 
Se V CeSS Government, white retaining the res. with them. Thus Ameri 1 '„° 
the Central uov' enumerates the powers of the Central Government and I ea ,.° 
Constuution only e c. ates Australia followed the American pattern e l 

the residuary powerto the States. . eQlral Governm ent leavi n f,C a °f 

only one eD “ m * ra |f c t a?es because their problems were similar to the 
dnary Powers t0 J r f,f ^“Inumera'iion. Federal and Provincial »; 
cans. In Canada tne Canadians were concious of unfortu 0af£ .'“l 

penSffi G S. a! culminating in Civil Wat of 1891. They were of**** 



/ 


CONSTITUTIONAL law op indja 


[Chap, 


324 


comings of the weak Centre. Hence, they wanted to opt for a strong Centre, 
Our Constitution-makers followed the Canadian scheme obviously opting for a 
strong Centre. However they added one more List — the Concurrent List. The 
Government of India Act, 1935, introduced a scheme of three-fold enumeration, 
Federal, Provincial and Concurrent. The present Constitution adopts the 
method followed by the Government of India Act, 1935, and divides the 
powers between the Union and the State in three Lists— the Union List, the 
State List, and (be Concurrent List. 

The Union List consists of 97 subjects. The Union Parliament has exclu- 
sive power to make laws on these subjects. The subjects mentioned in the 
Union List are of national importance, i. e. defence, foreign affairs, banking, 
currency and coinage, Union duties and taxes. 

The State List consists of 66 subjects. ' These are of a local importance, 
such as, public order and police, local Government, public health and sanita- 
tion, agriculture, forest, fisheries, education. Stale taxes and duties. The States 
have exclusive power to make laws on subjects mentioned in the State List. 

The (,42nd Amendment) Act, 1976, 1 amended the State List and has 
out education from it and has included it in the Concurrent List. 

The Concurrent List consists of 47 subjects. Both Centre and the States 
can make laws on the subjects mentioned in the Concurrent List. Uut in case 
of conflict between the Central and the State law on Concurrent subjects, the 
Central law will prevail. The Concurrent List is not found in any federal Con- 
stitutions. The framers added this list to the Constitution with a view to 
secure uniformity in the main principles of law throughout the country. The 
Concurrent List was to serve as a device to avoid excessive rigidity to two-list 
distribution. The Concurrent List thus, io the words of Pyle, is "a twilight 
zone, as it were, for both the Union and the States are competent to legislate 
in this field, without coming into conflict”. 

The Residuary Powers.— Article 248 vests the residuary powers in the 
Parliament. It sajs that ‘Parliament has exclusive power to make any law with 
respect to any mailer not enumerated in the Concurrent List or the State List*. 
Entry 97 in the Union List also lays down that Parliament has exclusive power 
to make laws with respect to any matter not enumerated in the State List or 
the Concurrent List, including any tax not mentioned io either of these Lists. 
Thus the Indian Constitution makes a departure from the practice prevalent io 
U. S. A,, Switzerland and Australia, where residuary powers are vested in the 
States. They reflect Ihe leanings of the Constitution-makers towards a strong 
Centre. 


LIST I- UNION LIST 

1. Defence of India and every part thereof including preparation for defence 
and all such act as may be conducive in timts of war to its prosecution 
and after its termination to effective demobilisation. 

2. Naval, military and air forces ; any other armed forces of the Union. 

2 [2-A. Deployment of any armed force of the Union or any other force subject to 

the control of the Union or any contingent or unit thereof in any State in 
aid of the civil power ; powers, jurisdiction, privileges and liabilities of the 
members of such forces while on such deployment.} 

1 Omitted Entry Nos. 19, 20 and 29. 

?. Added by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1276. 


325 


27] 1 EIXIIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE STATES 

3. Delimitation of cantonment areas, local self-government in such areas, 
the constitution and powers within such areas of cantonment authorities' 
and the regulation of house accommodation (including the control of 
rents) in such areas. 

4 Naval, military and air force works. 

5. Arms, firearms, ammunition and explosives. 

6. Atomic energy and mineral resources necessary for its production. 

’ 7. Industries declared by Parliament by law to be necessary for the purpose 
of defence of for the prosecution of war. 

8. Central Bureau of Intelligence and Investigation. 

9. Preventive detention for reasons connected with Defence, Foreign Affairs, 
or the Security of India ; person subjected to such detention. 

10. Foreign affairs : all matters which bring the Union into relation with any 
foreign country. 

11. Diplomatic, consular and trade representation. 

12. United Nations Organisations. 

13. Participation in International conferences, associations and other bodies 
and implementing of decisions made thereat. 

14. Entering into treaties and agreements with foreign countries and imple- 
menting of treaties, agreements and conventions with foreign countries. 

15. War and peace. 

16. Foreign jurisdiction. 

17. Citizenship, naturalisation and aliens. 

18. Extradition. 

19. Admission into, and emigration and expulsion from, India ; passports and 
visas. 

20. Pilgrmages to places outside India. 

21. Piratits and crimes committed on the high seas or in the air ; offences 
against the law of nations committed on land or the high seas or in the 
air. 

22. Railways. 

23. Highways declared by or uuder law made by Parliament to be national 
highways. 

24. Shipping and navigation on inland watetways, declared by Parliament by 
law to be national waterways, as regards mechanically propelled vessels ; 
the rule of the road on such waterways. 

25. Maritime shipping and navigation, including shipping and navigation on 
tidal waters ; provisions ot education and training for the mercantile 
marine and regulation of such education and training provided by States 
and other agencies. 

26. Lighthouses including lightships, beacons and other provisions for the 
safety of shipping and aircraft. 

27. Ports declared by or under Jaw made by Parliamennt or existing law to be 
major ports, moulding their delimitation, and the constitution and powers 
of port authorities therein. 



324 constitutional law op india {Chap. 

comings of the weak Centre. Hence, they wanted to opt for a strong Centre. 
Our Constitution-makers followed the Canadian scheme obviously opting fora 
strong Centre. However they added one more List— the Concurrent List. The 
Government of India Act, 1935, introduced a scheme of three-fold enumeration, 
Federal, Provincial and Concurrent. Tbc present Constitution adopts the 
method followed by the Government of India Act. 1935, and divides the 
powers between the Union and the State in three Lists— the Union List, the 
State List, and the Concurrent List, 

The Union List consists of 97 subjects. The Union Parliament has exclu- 
sive power to make laws on these subjects. Tbc subjects mentioned in the 
Union List are of national importance, I. e. defence, foreign affairs, banking, 
currency and coinage. Union duties and taxes. 

The State List consists of 66 subjects. These are of a local importance, 
such as, public order and police, local Government, public health and sanita- 
tion, agriculture, forest, fisheries, education. Stale taxes and duties. The States 
have exclusive power to make laws on subjects mentioned in the Slate List. 

The (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976, 1 2 amended the State List and has 
out education from it and has included it in the Concurrent LisL 

The Concurrent Lut consists of 47 subjects. Uoth Ccnlrc and ihe Stales 
can make laws on the subjects mentioned in the Concurrent List. Uut in case 
of conflict between the Central and the State law on Concurrent subjects, the 
Central law will prevail. The Concurrent List is Dot found in any federal Con- 
stitutions. The framers added this list to the Constitution with a view to 
secure uniformity in the main principles of law throughout the counlty. The 
Concurrent List was to sctve as a device to avoid excessive rigidity to two-list 
distribution. The Concurrent List thus, in the words of Pyle, is “a twilight 
zone, as it were, for both the Union aod the States are competent to legislate 
in this field, without coming into conflict". 

The Kcsiduary Powers.— Article 248 vests the residuary powers in the 
Parliament. It sajs that ‘Parliament has exclusive power to make any law with 
respect to any matter not enumerated in the Concurrent List or the State List’. 
Entry 97 in the Union List also lays down that Parliament has exclusive power 
to make laws with respect to any matter not enumerated in the State List or 
the Concurrent List, including any tax not mentioned in either of these Lists. 
Thus the Indian Constitution makes a departure from the practice prevalent in 
U. S. A., Switzerland and Australia, where residuary powers are vested in the 
States. They reflect the leanings of the Constitution-makers towards a strong 
Centre. 


LIST I- UNION LIST 

1, Defence of India and every part thereof including preparation for defence 
and all such act as may be conducive in times of war to iu prosecution 
and after its termination to effective demobilisation. 

2. Naval, military and air forces ; any other armed forces of the Union. 
s (2-/t. Deployment of any armed force of the Union or any other force subject » 

the control of the Union or any contingent or unit thereoj in any State in 
aid of the mil poner ; foners, jurisdiction, priuleges and liabilities of the 
members of such forces while on such deployment . ) 

1. Omitted fairy Nos. 19, 20 sad 29. 

2. Added by the Constitution (Forly-vccond Amendment) Act, 1 >76. 



KELAHONS BETWEEN TUB UNION AND THB STATES 


327 


Regulation and development of oilfields and mineral oil resources ; petro- 
leum and petroleum products ; other liquids and substances declared by 
Parliament by law to be dangerously inflammable. 

Regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent to which 
such regulation and development under the control of the Union is decla- 
red by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest. 

Regulation of labour and safety of mines and oilfields. 

Regulation and development of inler-State rivers and river valleys to the 
extent to which such regulation and development under the control of the 
Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient ia the public 
interest. 

Fishing and fisheries beyond territorial waters. 

Manufacture, supply and distribution of salt by Union agencies ; regula- 
tion and control of manufacture, supply and distribution of salt by other 
agencies. 

Cultivation, manufacture, and sale for export of opium. 

Sanctioning of cinematograph films for exhibition. 

Industrial disputes concerning Union employees. 

The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as the 
National Library, the Indian Museum, the Imperial War Museum, the 
Victoria Memorial and the Indian War Memorial, and any other like 
institution financed by the Government of India wholly or in part and 
declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national import- 
ance. 

The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as 
the Benares Hindu University, the Aligarh Muslim University and the 
1 lDelhi University ; the university established in pursuance of article 
37I*Ej ; any other institution declared by Parliament by law to be an insti- 
tution of national Importance. 

iDSlilUlions for scientific or technical education financed by the Govern- 
ment of India wholly or in part and declared by Parliament by law to be 
institutions of national importance. 

Union agencies and institutions for— 

(a) professional, vocational or technical training, including the training 
of public officers ; or 

(b) the promotion of special studies or research ; or 

(c) scientific or technical assistance in the investigation or detection of 
crime. 

Co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher 
education or research and scientific and technical institutions. 

Ancient and historical monuments and records and archaeological sites and 
remains, ^declared by or under law made by Parliament) to be of 
nalioual importance. 

Subs, for ihe words “Delhi University and” by the Constitution (Thirty-Second 
Amendment) Act, 1975. 

Subs, by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, for "declared by Parlia- 
ment by law”. 



326 CONillTUHONAL LAW OP INDIA [Chap. 

28. Port quarantine, including hospitals connected therewith ; seamen's and 
maiine hospitals. 

29. Airways ; aircraft and air navigation ; provision of aerodromes : regu- 
lation and organisation of air Uatfic and of aerodromes ; provision for 
aeronautical education and training and regulation of such education and 
training provided by States and other agencies. 

30. Carriage of passengers and goods by railway, sea or air, or by national 
waterways in mechanically propelled vessels. 

31. Posts and telegraphs ; telephones, wireless, broadcasting and other like 
forms of communication. 

32. Property of the Union and the revenue therefrom, but as regards property 
situated in a State [• * *} subject to legislation by the Slate, save in so 
far as Parliament by law otherwise provides. 

*[33. x x * x i] 

34. Courts of Wards for the estates of Rulers of Indian States. 

35. Public debt of the Union. 

36. Currency, coinage and legal tender ; foreign exchange. 

37. Foreign loans. 

38. Reserve Bank of India. 

39. Post Office Savings Banks. 

40. Lotteries organised by the Government of India or the Government of a 
State. 

41. Trade and commerce with foreign countries ; import and export across 
customs frontiers ; definition of customs frontiers. 

42. Inter-State trade and commerce. 

43. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of trading corporations, includ- 
ing banking, insurance and financial corporations but not including co- 
operative societies. 

44. Incoiporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, whether trad- 
ing or not, with objects not confined to one State, but not including uni- 
versities. 

45. Banking. 

46. Bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes and others like intruments. 

47. Insurance. 

48. Mock exchanges and futures markets. 

49. Patents, inventions and designs ; copyright ; trade-marks and merchan- 
dise marks. 

50. Establishment of standards of weight and measure. 

5J. Establishment of standards of quality for goods to be exported out of 
India or transported from one State to another. 

52. Industries, the control of which by the Union is declared by Parliament 
by law to be expedient in the public interest. 


1. the words and letters "specified in fart A or Part B ot the Pint Schedule" omitted by 
the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1956. 

2. Entry 33 omitted, ibid. 



328 coNsnrunoNAL law op jndia (Chap. 

68. The Survey of India, the Geological, Botanical, Zoological aDd Anthro- 
pological Survey of India ; Meteorological organisations. 

69. Census. 

70. Union public services ; all-India services ; Union Public Service Com- 
mission. 

71. Union pensions, that is to say, pensions payable by the Government of 
India or out of the Consolidated Fund of Ipdia. 

72. Elections to Parliament, to the Legislatures of States and to the offices of 
President and Vice-President ; the Election Commission. 

73. Salaries and allowances of members of Parliament, the Chairman and 
peputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and Deputy 
Speaker of the House or the People. 

74. Powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament and of the 
members and the Committees of each House ; enforcement of attendance 
of persons for giving evidence or producing documents before Committees 
of Parliament or commissions appointed by Parliament. 

75. Emoluments, the allowances, privileges and rights in respect ofleavc of 
absence, of the President and Governors ; salaries and allowances of the 
Ministers for the Union ; the salaries, allowances, and rights in respect of 
leave of absence and other conditions of service of the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General. 

76. Audit of the accounts of the Union and of the States. 

77. Constitution, organisation, jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court 
(including contempt of such Court) , and the fees taken therein ; persons 
entitled to practise before the Supreme Court. 

78. Constitution and organisation ’[including vocations] of the High Courts 
except provisions as to officers and servants of High Courts ; persons 
entitled to practise before the High Courts. 

J [79. Extension of the jurisdiction of a High Court to, and exclusion of the 
jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union territory.] 

80. Extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force 
belonging to any State to any area outside that State, but not so as to 
enable the police of one State to exercise powers and jurisdiction in any 
area outside that State without the consent of the Government of the 
State in which such area is situated ; extension of the powers and jurisdic- 
tion of members of a police force belonging to any State to railway areas 
outside that State. 

81. Inter-State migration ; inter-State quarantine. 

82. Taxes on income other than agricultural income. 

83. Duties of customs including export duties. 

84. Duties of excise on tobacco and other goods manufactured or produced in 
India except— 

(a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption, 


1. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteemta Amendment) Act. 1963 (with retrospective effect). 

2. Subs, by Ibe Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956. 



3 29 


27} DELATIONS BETH PEN THE UNION AND THfi SIA*ES 

(b) opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, 
but including medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or 
any substance included in sub-paragraph (b) of this Entry. 

85. Corporation tax. 

86. Taxes on the capital value of (he assets, exclusive of agricultural land, of 
individuals and companies ; taxes on the capital of companies. 

87. Estate duty in respect of property other than agricultural land. 

88. Duties in respect of succession to property other than agricultural land. 

89. Terminal taxes on goods or passengers, carried by railway, sea or air ; 
taxes on railway fares and freights. 

90. Taxes other than stamp duties od transactions in stock exchanges and 
future markets. 

91. Rates of stamp duty in respect of bills of exchange, cheques, promissory 
notes, bills of lading, letters of credit, policies of insurance, transfer of 
shares debentures, proxies and receipts. 

92. Taxes on the sale or purchase of newspapers and on advertisements pub- 

lished therein. 

•J92-A. Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, where- 
such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or 
commerce.] 

93 Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List. 

94. Inquiries, surveys and statistics for the purpose of any of the matters in 
this List. 

95. jurisdiction and powers or all courts, except the Supreme Court, with 
respect to any of the matters in this List ; admiralty jurisdiction. 

96. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees 
taken in any Court. 

97. Any other matter not enumerated in List II or List III including any tax 
not mentioned in either of those Lists. 

LIST II — STATE LIST 

1. Public order (but not including ’[the use of any naval, military or airforce ' 
or any other armed force of the Union or of any other force subject to the 
control of the Union or of any contingent or unit thereof] in aid of the civil 
power). 

®(2. Police {including railway and tillage police) subject to the prorlsbns of 
Entry 2 A of List 1 . 1 

3. V * •] Officers and servants of the High Court ; procedure in rent and 
revenuo courts ; fees taken in all courts except the Supreme Court. 

]. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act. 1936 

2. The words m bracks is substituted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 
1976. 

3. Subs, by the Constitution (Forty. second) Amendment Act. 1976. 

4. Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act. 1976. 

Const 42 



CoNsrmmoKM, U.w of ihoik 


{Chap. 


33o 

4 , Prisons, reformatories, Borstal institutions and other institutions of a like 
nature, and persons detained therein ; arrangements with other States for 
the use of prisons and other institutions. 

5, Local government, that is to say, the constitution and powers of municipal 
corporations, improvement trusts, district boards, milling settlement 
authorities and other local authorities for the purpose of local self-govern- 
ment or village administration. 

6. Public health and sanitation ; hospitals and dispensaries. 

7. Pilgrimages, other than pilgrimages to places outside India. 

8 Intoxicating liquors, that is to say, the production, manufacture, posses- 
sion, transport, purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors. 

9. Relief of the disabled and unemployed. 

10. Burials and burial grounds ; cremations and cremation grounds. 

11. H* * *1 

12. Libraries, museums and other similar institutions controlled or financed 
by the State ; ancient and historical monuments and records other than 
those ^declared by or under law made by Parliament! to be of national 
Importance. 

13. Communications, that is to say, roads, bridges ferries, and other means 
of communication not specified in List 1 ; municipal tramways, ropeways ; 
inland waterways ; and traffic thereon subject to the provisions of List I 
and List III with regard to such waterways ; vehicles other than mechani- 
cally piopolltd vehicles. 

14. Agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection 
against pests and prevention of plant diseases. 

15. Preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention or 
animal diseases ; veterinary training and practice. 

16. Pounds and the prevention of cattle trespass. 

17. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and 
embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of 
Entry 56 of List I. 

18. Land, that is to say, rights in or over land, land tenures including the 
relation of landlord and tenant, and the collectiou of rents ; transfer and 
alienation of agricultural land ; land improvement and agricultural loans ; 
colonization. 

19. s [* * *1 

20 . »[* * *] 

21. Fisheries. 

22. Courts of wards subject to the provisions of Entry 34 of List 1, encum- 
bered and attached estates. 

23. Regulation of mines and mineral development subject to the provisions 
of List I with respect to regulation and development under the control of 
the Union. 

1. Omitted by the Constitution (Forly-sceond Amendment) Act, 1976. 

2. Subs, by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, for “declared by Parlia- 
ment by law”. 

3. Entries 19 and 20 omitted by ibe Constitution (42od Amendment) Act, 1976. 


RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE STATES 


331 


Industries subject to the provisions of '[Entries 7 and 52J of List 1. 

within the State subject to the provisions of Entry 

PloauctioV'siipply and distribution of goods subject to the provisions of 
Entty 33 of List III. 

, ‘ Markets and fairs. 

; Money-lending and money-lenders ; relief of agrieultural iidebtedness. 

. Inns and inn-keepers. w i n dj ng up 0 f corporations, other than 

" 1 2 * v CQrP ° r ricSkd in List I and universities ; incorporated trading, literary, 
Stifi^Siglois and other societies and associations ; co-operat.ve 

societtes. performances ; cinemas subject to the provisions 

'■ ““ SfK entertainment, and amnsement, 

S. Workf. Unds^d buildings vested in or in the possession of the Slate. 

y' Elections to’the Legislature of the State subject to the provisions of any 

S P'^J al ?,“ 4 cSSof £ch.b£> atfd Deputy Chairman .hereof 
19. Powers. S^'co^Sei'e^aS inhere is”. UgSlat] reCouod,'. 

before committees of .£ Legislature of .he Sla e 
an Salaries and allowances of Ministers for the Stale. 

40. haiari • Slate Public Service Commission. 

42 state pensions, thal is to say, pensions payable by the State or oar of the 
41 emendated Food of the State. 

43. Public debt of the State.' 

44. Treasure trove. assessment and collection of revenue, the 

45 - nralmemmee of Jandrecords, survey for reveoue purposes and records of 

rights, and alienation of revenues. 

46. Taxes on agricultural income. 

47 Duties in respect of succession to agricultural land. 

48. ’ Estate duty in respect of agricultural land. 

49. Taxes on lands and buildings. 

1 Subs, by Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956. 

2 Entry 29 -M b, .be Com.ito.ioo «nd Amendment, Act, "*• 

Entry 16 omitted by the Commotion (Seventh Amendment, Act. 19! . 



332 


CONSTIIUTIONAT. LAW OP INDIA 


(Cbap. ' 


50. Taxes oa mineral rights subject to any limitations imposed by Parliament 
by Jaw relating to mineral development. 

51. Duties of excise on the following goods manufactured or produced ia the 
State and countervailing duties at the same or lower rates on similar 
goods manufactured or produced elsewhere in India 

(a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption ; 

(b) opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics ; 

but not including medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or 
any substance included in sub-paragraph (b) of this Entry. 

52. Taxes on the entry of goods into a local area for consumption, use or sele 
therein. 

53. Taxes on the consumption or sale of electricity. 

'[54. Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, subject 
to the provisions of Entry 92- A of List I.] 

55. Taxes on advertisements other than advertisements published in the news- 

papers *[and advertisements broadcast by radio or television], 

56. Taxes on goods and passengers carried by road or on inland waterways. 
51. Taxes on vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or not, suitable for use 

on roads, including tramcars subject to the provisions of Entry 35 of List 

58. Taxes on animals and boats. 

59. Tolls. 

60. Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments. 

61. Capitation taxes. 

62. Taxes on luxuries, including taxes on entertainments, amusements, 
betting and gambling. 

63. Rates of stamp duty in respect or documents other than those specified in 
the provisions of List I with regard to rates of stamp duty. 

64. Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List. 

65. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with res- 
pect of any of the matters in this List. 

66. Fees id respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees 
taken in any court. 

LIST III— CONCURRENT LIST 

1. Criminal law, including all matters included in the Indian Penal Code at 
the commencement of this Constitution but excluding offences against 
laws with respect to any of the matter specified in List I or List II and 
excluding the use of naval, military or ait forces or aoy other armed 
forces of the Union in aid of the civil power. 

2. Criminal procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution. 

1. Subs, by the Constitution Sixth (Amendment) Act, 1956. 

?- The words in brackets added by the Constitution (Forty -second Amendment^ Act. 



333 


27J RELATIONS BETWEEN THE ONION AND TAB STATES 

3. Preventive detention for reasons connected with the security of a State, tbc 
maintenance of public order, or the maintenance of supplies and services 
essential to the community ; persons subjected to such detention. 

4. Removal from one State to another State of prisoners, accused persons and 
persons subjected to preventive detention for reasons specified in Entry 3 
of this List. 

5. Marriage and divorce ; infants and minors adoption ; wills, intestacy and 
succession, joint family and partition ; all matters in respect of which 
parties in judicial proceedings were immediately before the commencement 
of this Constitution subject to their personal law. 

6. Transfer of property other than agricultural land ; registration of deeds 
and documents. 

7. Contracts, including partnership, agency, contracts of carrige, and other 
special forms of contracts, but not including contracts relating to agricul- 
tural land. 

8. Actionable wrongs. 

9. Bankruptcy and insolvency. 

10. Trust and trustees. 

11. Administrator-General and official trustees. 

l [Il A. Administration of justice ; constitution and organi.ation of all courts, 
except the Supreme Court and the High Courts] 

12. Evidence and oaths ; recognition of laws, public acts and records, and 
judicial proceedings. 

13. Civil procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Civil 

Piocedure at the commencement of this Constitution, limitation and arbi- 
tration. 

14. Contempt of court, but not including contempt of the Supreme Court. 

15. Vagrancy ; nomadic and migratory tribes. 

16. Lunacy and mental deficiency, including places for the reception or 
treatment of lunatics and mental deficients. 

17. Prevention of cruelty to animals. 

l [\7 A. Forests. 

17 B. Protection of wild animals and birds.] 

18. Adulteration of foodstuffs and other goods. 

19. Drugs and poisons, suject to the provisions of Entry 59 of List 1 with 
respect to opium. 

20. Economic and social planning. 

*[20 A. Population control and family planning.] 

21. Commercial and industrial monopolies, combines and trusts. 

22. Trade unions ; industrial and labour disputes. 

23. Social security aod social insurance ; employment and unemployment. 

24. Welfare of labour including conditions of work, provident funds, emplo- 
yer’s liability, workmen’s compensation, invalidity and old age pensions 
and maternity benefits. 


Added by ihe Con si i tut ion (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976. 



334 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA (Chap. 

l (25. Education, including technical education, medical education and univer- 
sities, subject to the provisions of Entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I ; 
vocational and technical training of labour,] 

26. Legal, medical and other professions 

27. Relief and rehabilitation of persons displaced from their original place of 
residence by reason of the setting up of the Dominions of India and 
Pakistan. 

28. Cbaritities and charitable institutions, charitable and religious endowments 
and religious institutions. 

29. Prevention of the extension from one State to another of infectious or 
contagious diseases or pests affecting men, animats or plants. 

30. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths. 

31. Ports other than those declared by or under law made by Parliament or 
existing law to be major ports. 

32. Shipping and navigation on inland waterways as regards mechanically 
propellad vessels, and the rule of the road on such waterways, and the 
carriage of passengers and goods on inland waterways subject to the 
provisions of List 1 with respect to national waterways. 

*(33. Trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of— 

(a) the products of any industry where the control of such industry 
by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in 
the public interest, and imported goods of the same kind as such 
products ; 

(b) foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils ; 

(c) cattle fodder, including oilcakes and other concentrates ; 

(d) raw cotton, whether ginned or unginned, and cotton seed ; and 

(e) raw jute.] 

*(33A. Weights and measures except establishment or standards] 

34. Price control. 

35. Mechanically propelled vehicles including the principles on which taxes on 
such vehicles arc to be levied. 

36. Factories. 

37. Boilers. 

38. Electricity. 

39. Newspapers, books and printing presses. 

40. Archaeological sites and remains other than those ^declared by or under 
law made by Parliament] to be of national importance. 

41. Custody, management and disposal of property (including agricultural 
land) declared law to be evacuee property. 

42. Acquisition and requisitioning of property. 


|. Subs, by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976. 

2. Subs by Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, Tor “declared by Parliament 
by law". 

J. Ins. by Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, 



333 


271 RELATIONS BETWEEN TUB ONION AND THE STATES 

43. Recovery in a State of claims in respect of taxes and other public demands, 
including arrears of land-revenue and sums recoverable as such arrears, 
arising outside that State. 

44. Stamp duties other than duties or fees collected by means of judicial 
stamps, but not including rate of stamp duty. 

45. Inquiries and statistics for the purposes of any of the matters specified in 
List II or List III. 

46. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with 
respect to any of the matters in this List. 

47. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees 
taken in any court. 

Principles of Interpretation of Lists 

The powers of Centre and States are divided, they cannot make laws out- 
side their allotted subjects. It is true that a scientific division is not possible 
and questions constantly arise— whether a particular subject falls in the sphere 
of one or the other Government. This duty in a Federal Constitution is 
entrusted with the courts. The Indian Courts have evolved the following 
principles of interpretation in order to determine the respective power of the 
Union and the States under three Lists : 

(l). Predominance of the Union List.— The opening words of Article 246 
(i) “notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3)*’ and the opening words 
of clause (3) “subject to clauses (1) and (2) expressly secure the predominance 
of the Union List over the State List and the Concurrent List and that of the 
Concurrent List over the Slate List. Thus in case of overlapping between the 
Union and the Stale List it is the Union List which is to prevail over the State 
List. In case of overlapping between the Union and the Concurrent List, it is 
again the Union List which will prevail. In case of conflict between the Con- 
current List and State List, it is the Concurrent List that shall prevail. 1 

2. Each Entry to be interpreted broadly. — Subject to the overriding 
predominance of the Union List, each entry in the various Lists should be 
interpreted broadly. In Calcutta Gas Co. Ltd . v. State of West Bengal 1 the 
Supreme Court said that the “widest possible” and "most liberal” interpreta- 
tion should be given to the language of each Entry. A general word used in an 

Entry must be construed to the extent to all ancillary or subsidiary 

matters which can fairly and reaionably be held to be included in it.* The 
Court should try ns far as possible, to reconcile the entries and to bring har- 
mony between them. When this is not possible only then the overriding power 
of the union Legislature — irte non-odsranre clause appiVes ana' ttle lc'oVraf pow er 
prevails.* 

Union of India v. IF. S . Dhillon * is an important judgment of the Supreme 
Court on the legislative relationship between the Union and States. The ques- 



27 ] RELATIONS BerWEflN THE ONION ANb THE STATUS 337 


la Stale of Bombay v. Balsara , 1 2 the Bombay Prohibition Act, which pro- 
hibited sale and possession of liquors in the State, was challenged on the 
ground that it incidently encroached upon import and export of liquors across 
custom frontier—a Central subject. It was contended that the prohibition, 
purchase, use, possession and sale of liquor will effect its import. The Court 
held the Act valid because the pith and substance of the Act fell under the 
State List and not under Union List, even though the Act incidently encroached 
upon the Union Powers of Legislation. 

4. Colourable Legislation. — In K. C. G. Narayan Deo v. State of Orissa* 
the Supreme.Coutt explained the meaning and scope of the doctrine of colour- 
able legislation 'in the following terms : 

“If the Constitution distributes the Legislative power amongst different 
Legislative bodies, which have to act within their respective spheres 
marked out by specific legislative Entries, or if there are limitations on 
the legislative authority in the shape of fundamental rights, question 
arises as to whether the Legislature in a particular case has or has not, in 
respect to the subject-matter of the statute or in the method of enact- 
ing it, transgressed the limits of its constitutional powers. Such 
transgression may be patent, manifest or direct, but it may also be 
disguised, covert or indirect, or and it is to this lattter class of cases 
that the expression colourable legislation has been applied in judicial 
pronouncements. The idea conveyed by the expression is that although 
apparently a Legislature in passing a statute purported to act within 
the limits of its powers, yet in substance and in reality it transgressed 
these powers, the transgression being veiled by what appears, on proper 

examination, to be a mere pretence or disguise In other words , 

it ts the substance of the Act that is material and not merely the form or 
outward appearance, and if the subject-matter in substance is something 
which is beyond the powers of that Legislature to legislate upon the 
form in which the law is clothed cannot save it from condemnation. 
The Legislature cannot violate the constitutional prohibitions by 
employing indirect methods.” 3 4 

‘Colourability is thus bound up with incompetency and not tainted with 
bad faith or evil motive. A thing is colourable which ia appearance only and 
not in reality, what it purports to be.* 

Thus what a Legislature cannot do directly it cannot do iodirccily. In 
these cases the Court will look in the true nature and character of the legis- 
lation and for that its object, purpose or design to make law on a subject and 
not its motive. If the Legislature has power to make law, motive in making 
the law is “irrelevant”. 5 6 

Kameshwar Singh v. Slate of Bihar* is the only case where a law has been 
declared invalid on the ground of colourable legislation. In this case the Bihar 
Land Reforms Act, 1950, was held void on the ground that though apparently 


1. A. I. R. 1951 S.C 318 ; State of Rajasthan v, G. Chawla. A. 1. R. 1959 S. C. 544. 

2. A. t. R. 1151 S.C. 37J. 

3. R. D. Joshi v. Ajit Mill*. A. I R. 1977 S. C. 2279. 

4. Ibid. 

3. Narcshwar v. A. P. S R. T. Corporation. A. 1. R. 19J9 S. C. 316. 

6 . A. I, R. 1952 S.C. 2S2 at p. 280. 

Const. 43 



33S 


const mmosiL law op inou 


(Chap. 

it purported to lay down principle for determining compensation yet in 
reality it did not lay down any such princip’e 3od thus indirectly sought to 
deprive the petitioners of any compensation. 

Repugnancy between a Central Law and a State Law 

Article 254 (I) says that if any provision of a law made by the Legislature 
of the State is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament which 
is competent to en3ct or to any provision of the existing law with respect to 
one of the matters enumerate in the Concurrent List, then the law made by 
Parliament, whether passed before or after the law made by the Legislature 
of such State or, as the case may be, the existing law shall prevail and the law 
made by the Legislature of the State shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, 
be void. 

Article 254 (1) only applies where there is inconsistency between a Central 
Law and a State Law relating to a subject mentioned in the Concurrent Cist. 
But the question is how the repugnancy is to be determined ? In M. KanmanuBil 
v. Union of India, 3 the Supreme Court reviewed all its earlier decisions on 
“repugnancy” under Article 254 and laid down the following tests : 

1. “That in order to decide the question of repugnancy it must be 
shown that the two enactments (Central Act and State Act) contain 
inconsistent and irreconcilable provisions, so that they cannot stand 
together or operate in the same field. 

2. That there can be no repeal by implication unless the inconsistency 
appears on the face of the two statutes. 

3. That where the two statutes occupy a particular field, but there is 
room or possibility of both the statutes operating in the same field 
without coming into collision with each other, no repugnancy 
results. 

4. That where there is no inconsistency but a statute occupying the 
same field seeks to create distinct and separate offences, no question 
of repugnancy arises and both the statute continue to operate in 
the same field."® 

The Supreme Coun also laid down guide-lines for resolving the repug- 
nancy 

1. Where provisions of the two Acts are inconsistent and absolutely 
irreconcilable, the Central Act will prevail and the State Act will 
become void in view of repugnancy. 

2. But if the State Law has obtained ibe consent of the President 
under clause (2) of Art. 254 it shall prevail and the Central Act 
would become void. 

3. Where a State Law though substantially within the scope of the 
Entries in the State List entrenches upon any of the entries in the 
Union List, the validity of the law will be upheld by applying the 
doctrine of pith and substance, if it appears that the law falls 
within the four corners or the State List and the encroachments 
purely incidental, or inconsequential. 

J. Prem Nath v. Stale of J. & K , A. 1. R I960 S. C. 749 

2. A I. R. 1979 S. C. 893. 

3. Ibid, per Fazal Ali J. at p. 910. 



27] 


RELATIONS BETWEEN TUB UNION AND THE STATES 


339 


4. Where, however a State law is inconsistent with a previous Central 
Law then such a law can be protected by obtaining the assent of the 
President under Art. 254 (2). The result of obtaining the assent 
of the President is that the State Act will prevail in the State 
and overrule the provisions of the Central Act so far as it applies 
to that State only. Such a state of affairs will exist only until 
Parliament may at time made a law adding to, or amending, vary, 
ing or repealing the law made by the State Legislature under that 
proviso to Art. 254. 

The above rule of repugnancy is, however, subject to the exception pro- 
vided in clause (2) of this Article. According to clause (2) if a State law with 
respect to any of the matters enumeraied in the Concurrent List contains any 
provision repugnant to the provisions of an earlier law made by Parliament, 
or an existiag law with respect to that matter, then the State law if it has been 
reserved for the assent of the President and has received his assent, shall prevail 
notwithstanding such repugnancy. But it would still be possible for the 
Parliament under the proviso to clause (2) to override such a law by subse- 
quently making a law on the same matter. If it makes such a law the State 
Law would be void to the extent of repugnancy with the Union Law. 

In M. Karunanidhi's case, mentioned above, the appellant challenged the 
validity of a State Act, Tamil Nadu Public Men (Criminal Misconduct) Act, 
1947 as amended by the Act of 1974 on the ground that it Is inconsistent 
with Central Acts (Indian Penal Code and Prevention of Corruption 
Act, 1974) and hence void. A CB1 inquiry was instituted against 
the appellant who were alleged to have abused their official position 
in the matter of purchase of wheat from Punjab. As a result of 
the inquiry a prosecution was launched against the appellant under the 
1PC and the Prevention of Corruptio i Act. The State Act was passed after 
obtaining the assent of the President. According to the allegation made against 
the appellant the acts said to have been committed by him fall within the period 
November 1974 to Match 1975. The State Act was repealed and the Presi- 
dent’s assent to that repealling of the State Act was given on June 6, 1977. So, 
by the time the appeal reached to the Supreme Court the State Act no longer 
existed. The appellant contended (hat even though the State Act was repealed it 
was repugnant to the provisions of the IPC and the Corruption Act and by vir- 
tue of Art. 254 (2) the provisions of the Central Act stood repealed and could 
not be revived after the State Act was repealed. He argued that even though 
the State Act was repealed the provisions of the Central Acts having them- 
selves been pro tanto repealed by the. State Act when it was passed could 
not be applied for the purpose of prosecuting the appallant unless they were 
re-enacted by the Legislature. The question before the court war whether 
there was such an irreconcilable inconsistency between the State Act and the 
Central Act that the provisions of the Central Act stood repealed and unless 
re-enacted cannot be invoked even after the State Act was itself repealed. 

The Supreme Court held that the State Act was not repugnant to the 
Central Acts and therefore it did not repeal the Central Acts which 
continued to be in operation even after the repeal of the State Act and can be 
invoked for the purpose of prosecuting the 3ppell3nt. The State Act creates 
distinct and separate offences with different ingredients and different punish- 
ments and does not in any way collide with the Central Acts. The State Act 
is rather a complimentary Act to the Central Acts. The State Act itself permits 
the Central Acts to come to its aid after an investigation it completed and a 
report is submitted. The State Act provides that the public man will have to be 
prosecuted under the Central Acts. Thus, far from there bring any inconm- 



338 coNSTi i ution a l law of indIa [Cbap. 

it purported to lay down principle for determining compensation yet in 
reality it did not lay down any such principle and thus indirectly sought to 
deprive the petitioners of any compensation. 

Repugnancy between a Central Law and a State Law 

Article 254 (1) says that if any provision of a law made by the Legislature 
of the State is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament which 
is competent to enact or to any provision of the existing law with respect to 
one of the matters enumerate in the Concurrent List, then the law made by 
Parliament, whether passed before or after the law made by the Legislature 
of such State or, as the case may be, the existing law shall prevail and the law 
made by the Legislature of the State shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, 
be void. 

Article 254 (1) only applies where there is inconsistency between a Central 
Law and a State Law relating to a subject mentioned in the Concurrent List. 
But the question is how the repugnancy is to be determined ? In M. Karunaniahl 
v. Union of India, 1 2 3 the Supreme Court reviewed all its earlier decisions on 
“repugnancy” under Article 254 and laid down the following tests : 

1. “That in order to decide the question of repugnancy it must be 
shown that the two enactments [Central Act and State ActJ contain 
inconsistent and irreconcilable provisions, so that they cannot stand 
together or operate in the same field. 

2. That there can be no repeal by implication unless the inconsistency 
appears on the face of the two statutes. 

3. That where the two statutes occupy a particular field, but there is 
room or possibility of both the statutes operating in the same field 
without coming into collision with each other, no repugnancy 
results. 

4. That where there is no inconsistency but a statute occupying the 
same field seeks to create distinct and separate offences, no question 
of repugnancy arises and both the statute continue to operate in 
the same field.”® 

The Supreme Court also laid down guide-lines for resolving the repug- 
nancy : 

1. Where provisions of the two Acts are inconsistent and absolutely 
irreconcilable, the Central Act will prevail and the State Act will 
become void in view of repugnancy. 

2. But if the State Law has obtained the consent of the President 
under clause (2) of Art. 254 it shall prevail and the Central Act 
would become void. 

3. Where a State Law though substantially within the scope of the 
Entries in the State List entrenches upon any of the entries in the 
Union List, the validity of the law will be upheld by applying the 
doctrine oT pith and substance, ITlt appears that the law falls 
within the four corners of the State List and the encroachments 
purely incidental, or inconsequential. 

1. Prem Nath v. Stale of J. & K., A. I. R I960 S. C 749. 

2. A l.R. 1979 S.C. 898. 

3. Ibid, per Fazal Ali J. at p. 910. 



27] RELATIONS BETS* EEN THE UNION AND TUB STATES 341 

(4) Parliament's power to legislate for giving effect to treaties and 
international agreements. — Article 253 empowers the Parliament to make any 
law for the whole or any part of the territory of India for implementing 
treaties and international agrrements and conventions. In other words, the 
normal distribution of powers will not stand in the way of Parliament to pass 
a law for giving effect to an international obligation even though such law 
relates to any of the subjects in the State List. 

5. In case of failure of Constitutional machinery in a State. — Under 
Article 356 Parliament is empowered to make laws with respect to all matters 
in the State List when the Parliament declares that the Government of the Stale 
cannot be carried on i a accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. 

Thus from the above it is quite evident that the States are not vested with 
exclusive jurisdiction over the subjects assigned to the Stales by the Constitution, 

making the States to some extent subordinate to the Centre. Iadeed 

this is a clear depat tute from the strict application of the federal principle foll- 
owed in America and Australia. Critics of our Constitution take these pro- 
visions in support of their arguments that due to these provisions the federal 
character of the Indian Constitution, . if not disappeared, has been greatly 
modified. 

It is submitted that these provisions are merits rather than demerits of the 
Indian Constitution. They enable the Centre to legislate in exceptional circum- 
stances on the State subjects without amending the Constitution and thus 
introducing a certain amount of flexibility in the scheme of distribution of 
powers. Moreover, they are only resorted to in most ca'es with the consent of 
the States. Again, they are invoked only where the/e are exceptional circum- 
stances and that too for a limited period. Thus the framers have incorporated 
the federal principle in our Constitution in a modified form in the light of the 
experience in other federations and in view of the peculiar requirements of our 
country. 

The plan ot the distribution oflegislative powers thus clearly indicates a 
strong tendency and forwards a high degree of centralization which is deemed 
as a product of realism and in line with a general tendency towards centraliza- 
tion in all federations. 

CENTRE'S CONTROL OYTR STATE LEGISLATION 

In addition to the Parliament’s power to legislate directly on the State 
subjects under the foregoing Articles, the Constitution also provides for the 
Centre’s consent before a Bill passed by a State Legislature can become a law 
The following Articles give Centre a control over State legislation. 

Article 31 (3) provided that a State law providing for compulsory acquisi- 
tion of private property shall have no effect unless it has received the consent 
of the President. Article 31 has been omitted by the Constitution, 44th 
Amendnent Act, 1978. Article 31-A grants immunity to laws providing for 
agrarian reforms from Arts. 14, i9 and 31. The immunity of Art. 31-A wifi 
not be available to a State law unless it has received the asssent of the Presi- 
dent. The object of these provisions is to ensure uniformity in law providing 
for agrarian reforms. 

Article 200 directs the Governor of a State to reserve a Bill passed by a 
State Legislature for the consideration of the President if in his opinion, if pass- 
ed into law\ would derogate the powers of the High Court so as to endanger 



340 


CONSTITUTIONAL tAW OF INDIA 


[Clap. 

tency, the Central Acts are applied to a public man by the State Act after 
the preliminary investigation is over. The language of S. 29 of the State 
Act os substituted by the Act of 1974 also clearly indicates the intention of 
the Legislature that the State Act was passed “in addition to apy other law 
for the time being in force” which includes the Penal Code and the Prevention 
of Corruption Act. 

In Deep Chand v. Slate ofU. P, 1 the validity of U. P. Transport Service 
(Development) Act was involved, by this Act the State Government was 
authorised to make the Scheme for nationalisation of Motor Transport in the 
Slate. The law was necessitated because the Motor Vehicles Act, 1932, did 
rot contain any provision for the nationalisation of Motor Transport Services. 
Later on, in 1956 the Parliament with a view to introduce a uniform law 
amended the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, and added a new provision enabling 
the State Government to frame rules of nationalisation of Motor Transport. 
The Couit held that since both the Union Law and the State Law occupied the 
same field, the State Law was void to the extent of repugnancy to the Union 
Law. 

PARLIAMENT’S POWER TO LEGISLATE ON STATE SUBJECTS 

Arts. 249, 250, 252,'253 and 356.— Though in normal time the distribution 
of powers must be strictly maintained and neither the State nor the Centre can 
enctoach upon the sphere allotted to the other by the Constitution, yet in certain 
exceptional circumstances the above sy»tem of distribution is cither suspended or 
the powers of the Union Parliament are extended over the subjects mentioned 
}n the State List. The exceptional circumstances are : 

S Tower of Parliament to legislate In the national interest.— According 
e 249, if tie Rajya Sabha passes a resotui ion supported by 2/3 of the 
members present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national 
interest that Patliament should make laws with respect to any matter enumerat- 
ed wiihin State List, then it shall be lawful for the Parliament to make laws 
for the whole or any pait of the territory oflndia with respect to that matter 
so long as the resolution remains in force. Such a resolution normally lasts 
for a year ; it ma> be renewed as many times necessary but not exceeding a 
year at a time. These laws of Parliament will, however, cease to have effect 
on the expiration of the period of six months after resolution has ceased to 
operate. 

(2) During a Proclamation of Emergency.— According to Article 250 
while the Proclamation of Emergency .is in operation the Parliament shall have 
power to make laws foi the whose or any patt of the territory of India with 
respect to all matters in the State List. Such a law, however, shall cease to 
have effect on the expiration of six months after the proclamation of emergency 
has ceased to operate. 

(3) Parliament’s power to legislate with the consent of Ite Stales —Accord- 
ing to Article 252 if the Legislature of two or more States pass resolution of 
the effect that it is desirable to have a law passed by Parliament on any matters 
in the State List, it shall be lawful for Parliament to make l3ws regulating 
that matter. Any other State may adopt such a law by passing a resolution 
to that effect. Such laws can only be amended or repeated by the Act of 
Parliament. 

I AIR 19J9 SC 648 ;Zaverbhai v. Siale of Bomtay, AIR ] 9*4 SC 757 ; Tika Raroji v. 
Siale of V. P., AIR I3'6 SC 676 




271 


RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE STATES 


341 


(4) Parliament’s power to legislate for giving effect to treaties and 
international agreements, —Article 2 53 empowers the Parliament to make any 
law for the whole or any part of the territory of India for implementing 
treaties and international agrrements and conventions. In other words, the 
normal distribution of powers will not stand in the way of Parliament to pass 
a law for giving effect to an international obligation even though such law 
relates to any of the subjects in the State List. 

5. In case of faiturc of Constitutional machinery in a Stale. — Under 
Article 356 Parliament is empowered to make laws with respect to all matters 
in the State List when the Parliament declares that ibe Government of the State 
cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. 

Thus from the above it is quite evident that the States are not vested with 
exclusive jurisdiction over the subjects assigned to the Stales by the Constitution, 

making the States to some extent subordinate to the Centre. Indeed 

this is a dear departure from the strict application of the federal principle foll- 
owed in America and Australia. Critics of our Constitution take these pro- 
visions in support of their arguments ibat due to these provisions the federal 
character of the Indian Constitution. . if not disappeared, has been greatly 
modified. 

It is submitted that these provisions are merits rather than demerits of the 
Indian Constitution. They enable the Centre to legislate in exceptional circum- 
stances on the State subjects without amending the Constitution and thus 
introducing a certain amount of flexibility in the scheme of distribution of 
powers. Moreover, they are only resorted to in most ca«es with the consent of 
the States. Again, they are invoked only where there are exceptional circum- 
stances and that too for a limited period. Thus the framers have incorporated 
the federal priociple in our Constitution in a modified form in the light of the 
experience in other federations and in view of the peculiar requirements of our 
country. 

The plan ol the distribution of legislative powers thus clearly indicates a 
strong tendency and forwards a high degree of centralization which is deemed 
as a product of realism and in line with a general tendency towards centraliza- 
tion in all federations. 

CENTRE’S CONTROL OVER STATE LEGISLATION 

In addition to the Parliament’s power to legislate directly on the State 
subjects under the foregoing Articles, the Constitution also provides for the 
Centre’s consent before a Bill passed by a State Legislature can become a law 
The following Articles give Centre a control over State legislation. 

Article 31 (3) provided that a State law providing for compulsory acquisi- 
tion of private property shall have no effect unless it has received the consent 
of the President. Article 31 has been omitted by the Constitution. 44th 
Amertdnent Act, )978. Article 31 -A grants immunity to laws providing for 
agrarian reforms from Arts. 14. 19 and 31. The immunity of Art. 31-A will 
not be available to a State law unless it has received the asssent of the Presi- 
dent. The object of these provisions is to ensure uniformity in law providing 
for agrarian reforms. 

Article 200 directs the Governor of a State to reserve a Bill passed by a 
State Legislature for the consideration of the President if in his opinion, if pass- 
ed into law, would derogate the powers of the High Court so as to endanger 



342 


CONSinUIIOKAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


the position which the Court designed to fulfil under the Constitution. The 
object of the Article is to preserve the independence and dignity of a High 
Court which may be affected by a State law. 

Article 288 (2) authoiises a State to tax in respect of water or electricity 
stored, generated, consumed distributed or sold by any authority established by 
law made by Pailiament. But it makes it clear that no such law shall be valid 
unless it has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has 
received his assent. 

Article 30! (b) authorises a State Legislature to impose reasonable res* 
trictious on the fecdom of trade, commerce and intercourse within the State in 
the ‘public interest'. But such laws cannot be introduced in the State Legisla- 
ture without the previous sanction of the President. This provision is intended 
to ensure the free flow of trade and corometce which may be hampered by 
unreasonable restrictoos imposed by a State law. 1 In this case, the Supreme 
Court struck down a law on the ground that it was passed without Centre's 
consent 


B. ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS— Arts. 256-263 
“A federal scheme involves the setting up of dual Governments and divi- 
sion of powers. But the success and strength of the federal policy depends upon 
the maximum of co-operation and co-ordination between the government."* 
In fact, the adjustment of administrative relations between the Union and tbe 
States is one of the knotiuh of the problems in a federal Government. The 
framers of the Indian Constitution therefore decided to include detailed provi- 
sions to avoid clashes between the Centre and tbe States in the administrative 
domain and to ensure effective Federal Executive control of matters falling 
within the jurisdiction of the Parliament. In order to ensure smooth and proper 
functioning of the administrative machinery, they made provisions for meeting 
all types of eventualities resulting through the working of federalism or emer- 
gence of new circumstances due to difference of opinion between the dual 
authorties. Moreover, the Union Government was to be responsible for 
maintaining peace and order in the country. Therefore co-operation and co- 
ordination between the Centre and the State Administrative authorities was 
thought indispensable. In emergency the Government of India exercises com- 
plete control over the State and functions as if it is a Unitary Government. 

Control of Union over States : Articles 256 to 263 provide for Union 
control over States even in normal times through following ways : 

(a) Direction by the Union to the State Governments. 

(b) Delegation of Union functions to the States. 

(c) All-India Services. 

(d) Grant-in-aid. 

(a) Direction by the Centre to the Stales. — “The idea of Union giving 
direction to the States is foreign and repugnant to a rule of federal system. 
But this idea was taken by the framers of our Constitution from the Govern- 
ment of India Act, 1935, in view of the peculiar conditions of this country and 
particularly circumstances out of which the fedearation emerged "® 

S. Atiaban Tea Co v Slate of Assam, AIR 19JI SC 232 

2. Sre Basu, I). D. .Introduction to the Constitution of India, p. 263. See also Vishnu 
Bhagwan, Indian C onstitution. I "69 Ed . p. 227. 

3. Ibid. 



27] RELATIONS BETWEEN TUB UNION AND THE STATES 343 

Article 256 provides that the executive power of the State shall be so 
exercised as to ensure compliance with the laws made by Parliament and the 
executive power of the Union shall also extend to the giving of such directions 
to a State as it may deem essential for the purpose. Thus power to give 
direction was necessary because, if the Centre was not vested with such power, 
the proper execution of the laws passed by the Parliament would become 
impossible. Accordingly, Article 257 enacts that the States must exercise their 
executive power ia such a way so as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of 
the executive power of the Union in the State. For this purpose, the Central 
Government can give directions as to in which way the State should exercise 
its executive power. The powers of the Central Government also extend to 
giving directions to a State in two specific matters: — (1) the construction and 
maintenance of means of communication which are declared to be of national 
or military importance, (2) measures to be taken for the protection of (he rail* 
ways within the State. 1 This power of giving direction does not in any way 
affect the power of the Parliament to declare high ways or waterways to be 
natural high ways and waterways and to construct and maintain means of com* 
munications of part of its functions with respect to naval, military or airforce 
works. 2 

If in carrying out the directions of the Union Government the State incurs 
additional costs the Union Government under Article 257 (4) shall pay to the 
State Government such sum as may be agreed. If the Centre and States 
cannot come to an agreement regarding the compensation to be paid by the 
former to the latter, the matter is to be referred to the arbitrator to be appointed 
by the Chief Justice of India. 

The Constitution prescribes a coercive sanction for the enforcement of its 
directions through Article 356. Article 356 provides that if the State has failed 
to comply with or to give effect to ar.y directions given by the Central Govern* 
ment then the President is empowered to declare an emergency to the effect that 
the State Government cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions 
of the Constitution and assume himself all functions of the State. 

(b) Delegation of Union's function to the States. — Under Article 258 the 
Parliament may with the consent of the State Government entrust either con- 
ditionally or unconditionally to that Government or its officers’ functions 
relating to any matters falling within the executive powers of the Union. 
Parliament is also empowered to use State machinery for the enforcement of 
Union Laws and for this purpose may confer powers or impose duties upon 
the State or its officers or authorities thereof in respect of these matters to see 
that the laws are made applicable to the State It is to be noted that while 
under clause (1) the delegation cf power is made with the consent of tfce State 
no consent of the State is necessary under clause (2). 

Like the Central Government, the State Government ran also delegate its 
power on the Union and its officers. Article 258-A lays dow-n that the Gover- 
nor of the State may with the consent of the Government of India, entrust 
to that Government or its officers* functions, relating to any matter to which 
the executive power of that Government extends. It is thus clear that where it 
is inconvenient for either Government to directly carry out its administrative 
functions it may get those functions executed through the other Government. 


1. Article 257, cUuvcs (2) and ( J). 

2. Article 257(2), provno. 



344 


CONSTIl UIIONAL U« OF INDIA 


[Ch3p. 


(c) AlMndia Servlets.— Beside the separate services for the Union and 
the States the Constitution provides for the creation of an additional "Att* 
India Service” common to the Uoion and the States. According to Article 
312 if the Rajya Sabha passes a resolution supported by not less than two- 
thirds of the members present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the 
national interest to do so. Parliament may by law provide for the creation 
of one or more All-India Services common to the Union and the States and 
also regulate the recruitment and ih: conditions of service of persons appointed 
to any service. 

The object of this provision is to ensure greater inter-Statc co-ordination 
and implementation of the policies of the Central Government through these 
officers. This also enables the Central Government to exercise a control over 
Stale in matters of execution of Union laws. 

(d) Grant-in-aid.— Under the Constitution the financial resources of the 
Stales are very limited though they have to do many work of social uplift 
under directive principles. In order to cope with their ever-expanding needs, the 
Central Government makes grants-in-aid to the States. Grants-in-atd to States 
thus serve two purposes, (I ) through ii Central Government exercises a strict 
control over Slate because grants are granted subject to certain conditions. If 
any State does not agree to the conditions the Central Government mjy with- 
draw the grant, and (2) it generates a Centre-state co-ordination and co-opcra- 
tioo if a State wants to develop its welfare schemes for the people of the State 
it may ask for financial help from the Centre. 

(e) Full faith and credit clause.- Article 261 declares that full faith and 
credit shall be given throughout the territory of India to public acts, records 
and Judicial proceedings of the Union and every State. According to clause 
0) final judgment or orders delivered or passed by Civil Courts in any part of 
the territory of India can be executed anywhere in the country according to 
law. 

DISPUTES RELATING TO WATER 

Article 262 authorises the Parliament to provide by law for the adjudica- 
tion of any dispute or complaint with respect to the uses, distribution or 
control of the waters of any inter-Statc rivers and river valleys. Under 
clause (2) of this Article, Parliament may by law provide that neither the 
Supreme Court nor any other court shall have any jurisdiction In respect of 
such disputes and complaints relating to water of inter-Staie rivers and river 
valleys. Under Art. 262 Parliament has passed the River Board Act, 1956 
and the Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956. The River Board Act is meant 
for the regulation and development of Inter-Statc rivers and river valleys. This 
is established on the request of the State Governments to advise the Govern- 
ment. The Water Disputes Act empowers the Central Government to set up a 
Tribunal for the adjudication of such disputes. The decision of the tribunal 
shall be final and binding on the parties to the dispute. Neither the Supreme 
Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any water dispute 
which may be referred to such a Tribunal under that Act. 

(j) Inter-State Council.— Though a federal Constitution involves the 
sovereignty of the units within their respective territorial (units it is not 
possible for them to remain in complete isolation from each other and the very 
exercise of internal sovereignly by the units require its recognition by and co- 
ordination of other units of the federation. Federal Constitutions therefore 
generally provide certain rules for co-operation which the units are expected 
to take into consideration while dealing with each other. 



27J 


RELATIONS DEI WEEN TUB UNION AND TUB STATES 


345 


Article 263 provides for the establishment of an Inter-State Council to 
effect co-ordination between States. The Inter-State Council is appointed by 
the President if it appears to him that the public interest would be served by 
its establishment. The Inter State Council is generally charged with the duty 
of— 

(a) inquiring into and advising upon disputes which may arise between 
States ; 

(b) investigating and discussing subjects in which some or all of ihe States 
of the Union and one or more of the States have common interest ; 

(c) making recommendation on any subject and for the better co- 
ordination of policy and action with respect to that subject. 

Though the Council can deal with legal or non-Iegal matters but its func- 
tion is merely advisory. 

The main object behind this provision is to establish a regular recognised 
machinery for inter- Government consultation so that departments or institu- 
tions of co-ordination and research are to be maintained at the Centre in such 
matters as agriculture, forestry, irrigation, education and public health. 

The President has exercised this power by constituting the Central Coun- 
cil of Health and the Central Council of Local Self-Government. 

The States Re-organisation Act, 1951 has set up five Zonal Councils, 
namely, (the Central Zone, the Northern Zone, the Eastern Zone, the Western 
Zone and the Southern Zone). 

The Zonal Councils consist of the Union Home Minister who acts as an 
ex-officio Chairman of the Councils and the Chief Minister of the State and two 
other Ministers nominated by the Governor of the member State. The Chief 
Secrelary of the State concerned and a person from Planning Commission arc 
included as advisers in such Councils. 

These Councils have been established for the promotion of co-operation 
and for making efforts to solve common problems or the member States. They 
arc to encourage ioter-State co-operation for successful implementation and 
execution of development projects and also act as advisory bodies in matters of 
common interest particularly in respect of economic and social planning. 

C. FINANCIAL RELATIONS (Arts. 264-291) 

“No system of federation can be successful unless both the Union and 
the States have at iheir disposal adequate financial resources to enable them 
to discharge their respective responsibilities under the Constitution."* It i* 
indeed a hard fact that if the legislative and administrative authority of the 
constituent units is to be maintained ihey must be autonomous financially. 
However, this principle of federation has not been fully implemented in any of 
the existing federations of the world. In Canada and Australia the sources of 
revenue allotted to the Units arc so meagre that they have to be substantially 
assisted by Central grants. The Swiss Federation, on the other hand, mikes the 
Centre subservient to the units as regards financial contribution from the fatter 
to the former. The American Constitution tried its best to ensure complete 
financial independence for both the Union and tbr Slates, but with the passage 

I. Bssu. r»t> — Introduction to ib« Const tfotion of loda, p Ml. 

Const. 44 



34U CONSUL till ONAL LAW OF INDIA (Cliap. 

of time, the increased obligation of the States due to the advent of the 
“positive State” made them rely on grants-in-aid from the Central Government . 
This has certainly led to the development of centralization and curbing of 
autonomy of the States in U.S.A. 

In India, the scheme of distribution of sources of revenue between the 
Centre and the States is based on the Scheme laid down in the Government of 
India Act, 1935. 

The framers of the Indian Constitution desired that the scheme of finan- 
cial relations be flexible and adaptable to varying needs and review able perio- 
dically in the light of experience, of Central resources of State’s needs, and 
available data. For this they recommended for the appointment of Finance 
Commission to review the whole position from time to time. The Constitution 
under Article 280, therefore, provides for the appointment of a Finance Com- 
mission within two years of the commencement and thereafter at the expiration 
of every fifteen years or earlier if the President considers it necessary. It con- 
sists of a Chairman and four other members to be appointed by the President. 
The Finance Commission is to recommend to the President the requisite 
changes to be made in the distribution of taxes between the Union and the 
States and (2) to define the principle on which the Union Government was to 
make grants-in-aid to the States. The Constitution of India thus introduces a 
unique element of flexibility while taking the problems of distribution of 
public revenues. “No other federal Constitution makes such elaborate pro- 
visions as the Constitution of India with respect to the relationship between 
the Union and the States in the financial field. In fact, by providing for the 
establishment of Finance Commission for the purpose of allocating and re- 
adjusting the receipts from certain sources, the Constitution has made an 
original contribution in this extremely complicated aspect of Federal relation- 
ship.” 1 


Taxation only by authority or law.— Article 265 says that no lax can be 
levied or collected except by authority of law. No tax can be imposed by an 
executive order. The law providing for imposition of tax must be a valid 
law, 2 3 4 that is, it should not be prohibited by any provisions of the Constitution 
[e. g.. Articles 276 (2), 2S6, etc]. Thus, a tax law will be void if it violates the 
fundamental rights to equality guaranteed by Article 14. 

The prohibition that no tax can be levied or collected without the autho- 
rity of law, applies only in respect of taxes. The prohibition of this Act does 
not 3pply in respect of a fee. A tax is a common burden and the only return 
the tax-payer gets is the participation in the common benefit of the State. 
A tax is compulsory exaction of money by public authority for public purposes 
enforceable by law and is not a payment for services rendered.* 

Double Taxation cot prohibited under Art. 265 —There is nothing in 
Art. 265 which prohibits the Legislature to impose a tax mice on a thing.* 


1 . Pylee — Cods tituiional Government u» India, p. 544. 

2. M/s. Chhoiabhai v. Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 1006. 

3. Commissioner H. R. E. v. L T. Swamiar, AIR 1954 SC 282 ; Sn Jagannath v. State 
of Onssa, AIR 1954 SC 400 ; Corporation of Calcutta v. Liberty Cinema, AIR 1965 
SC 1107. 

4. Avindet Singh v. State of Punjab. AIR 1979 SC 121. 



271 


ABLATIONS BETtVES-J IH8 UNION AND TAB STATES 


347 


• Scheme of Distribution of Revenue 

Article 268 provides the scheme of the distribution of revenue between 
the Union and the States. The States possess exclusive jurisdiction over taxes 
enumerated in the State List. The Union is entitled to the proceeds of the 
taxes in the Union List. The Concurrent List includes no taxes. However, 
it is to be noted that while the proceeds of taxes within the State List are 
entirely retained by the States, proceeds of some of the taxes in the Union List 
may be allotted, wholly or partially, to the States. The Constitution mentions 
for categories of the Union taxes which are wholly or partially assigned to the 
States : 

1. Duties levied by the Union but collected and appropriated by the 
States.— According to Article 268 stamp duties and duties of excise on 
medicinal and toilet preparations mentioned in the Union List shall be levied 
by the Central Government. These duties are collected by the States within 
which such duties are leviable. The proceeds of such duties are assigned to 
the States. 

Taxes levied and collected by (he Union and assigned to the States.— 
According to Article 269 (1) duties in respect of succession to property other 
than agricultural land, (2 estate duty in respect of property other than agri- 
cultural land, (3) terminal taxes on goods or passengers carried by railway, 
sea or air, (4) taxes on railway fares and freights, (5) taxes other than stamp 
duties on transactions in stock exchanges and future markets, (6) taxes on the 
sale or of purchase of the newspapers and advertisements published therein, 
(7) taxes on the sale purpose of goods in the course of inter-State commerce 
and trade are levied and collected by the Union of India but the net proceeds 
are distributed among the States in such manner as may be prescribed by 
Parliament by law. 

3 Taxes levied and collected by the Union but distributed between (he 
Union and States. — According to Article 270. Taxes on iDcome other than 
agricultural income and corporation tax shall be levied and collected by the 
Union and is distributed between the Union and the States. After deducting 
sums attributable to the Union territories and to the Union emoluments a pres- 
cribed percentage of the taxes is distributed among States in such* manner as 
may be prescribed by law. 

4. Taxes levied and collected by the Union may be distributed between the 
Union 3nd States. — Art. 272 provides that Union duties of excise other than 
those on medicinal and toilet preparations as are mentioned in the Union List 
arc levied and collected by the Government of India but if Parliament by law 
provides the whole or any part of the net proceeds of that duty Shall he distri- 
buted among those States to which the law imposing the duty extends in 
accordance with such principles of distribution as may be formulated by such 
law. 

5 Taxes for the purpose of the Union. — Art. 271 provides that if 
Parliament at any time increases any of the duties or taxes mentioned in Artrs. 
269 and 270 by imposing a surcharge the whole proceeds of any such surcharge 
shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of India. 

6. Grants-in-aid. — The Constitution provides for three kinds of grants- 
in-aid to the States from the Union resources : — (i) under Article 273 grants- 
in-aid will be given to the State of Assam, Bihar, Orissa and West Bengal in 
lieu of export duty on jute products. The sums of such grants are pres- 



348 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Chap. 


cribed by the President with the consultation of the Finance Commission. 
These sums shall be given to the States for a period of ten years from the 
commencement of the Constitution. (2) Article 275 empowers Parliament to 
make such grants, as it may deem essential, to the States which arc in need of 
financial assistance. The Constitution also provides for special grants given to 
the States which undertake schemes of development for the purpose of pro- 
moting the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes or raising the level of administra- 
tion of the scheduled areas. A special grant to Assam is given for this 
purpose. (3) Under Article 282 both the Union and a State may make grants 
for any public purpose even if it relates to a subject over which it cannot make 
laws. The Central Government can under this Article make grants to hospitals 
or to schools. 


Under Article 271 Parliament is empowered to increase any of the duties 
or the taxes mentioned in Articles 269 and 270 by a surcharge for the purposes 
of the Union and the entire proceeds of any such surcharge shall go to the 
Union and form part of the Consolidated Fund of India. According to 
Article 274 no Bill which imposes or varies any tax or duty ia which States 
are interested or which varies the meaning of “agri.ultural income” or which 
affects the principle of the distribution of moneys to States, or which imposes 
a surcharge for the purposes of the Union, shall be introduced or moved 
in cither House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the President. 


7. Taxes for the purposes of States.— Articles 276 and 277 are saving 
provisions. These Articles save the authority of the States to levy taxes, on 
subject now forming Part of the Union List, immediately before the commence- 
ment of the Constitution. Thus taxes which are being levied by a State or a 
Municipality or other local authority, notwithstanding that those taxes are 
mentioned in the Union List, continue to be levied by those authorities until 
Parliament by law makes contrary provision. 1 Art. 276 empower the States 
to impose taxes on professions, trades, callings and employment for the benefit 
of the State or of a municipality, district board, local boards or other local 
authorities. But the provision of Article 277 does not extend to taxes levied 
under a law passed after the Constitution came into force. 2 


In Amraoti Municipality y. Ram Chandra* the Municipality of Amraoti, 
under a pre-Constitution law, imposed a terminal tax on certain goods These 
taxes now can only be levied by the Parliament. The Municipality thereafter 
issued a notification imposing taxes on gold and silver which were not taxable 
under the pie- Constitution law. The Supreme Court held the notification 
as unconstitutional on the ground that Article 277 could neither permit increase 
in the rate nor alteration in the incidence. In S. I. Corpn. <P) ud \ 
Secy., Board of Revenue * a tax was imposed under a law which was passed 
before but brought into force after the commencenment of the Constitui inn 
The Court held that Article 277 could only save the tax if it had actually been 
levied and collected before the Constitution came into force. 3 


Restrictions on States Taxing Power 


Restriction on the power or the States to impose tax on the sale or purchase 
of goods.— The State has, like the Union, power to levy tax on the sale and 


1 . M. B S. Ousbadbaly* v. Union of India, A. I. R . 1963 S. C. 622. 

2 . Liberty Cinema v. Commr., Calcutta Corporation, A. I. R. 1959 .5 

3 . A. I.R. 19M S.C.1IK.' 

A. A. t. R. 1964 S.C 207. 



27' 


RECAN0N3 08HVE8N TUB UNION AND TUB STATES 


3ti? 


purchase of goods, other than newspapers. Article 2S6, however, imposes the 
following restrictions on the State’s power to levy sales-tax. 

(i) No State can impose a tax on the sale or purchase of goods when such 
sale or purchase takes place outside the State. 1 2 3 4 5 

This means lh3t only the Centre can levy tax on sale and purchase of 
goods when it takes place in the intercourse of trade and commerce. 
Clause (2) empowers Parliament to lay down the principles for determin- 
ing when a sale or purchase takes place outside the State or in the course of 
import into or export from India. The Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, passed by 
Parliament lays dawn the principles for determining the situs of the sale. 

(ii) No State can impose a tax on the sale or purchase of goods where 
such sale nr purchase takes place In the course of import of goods into or 
export of the goods out of the territory of India. 

When can a sale or purchase be said to take place “in the course 
ofimport ,, ? a The Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, defines such a sale. A sale 
or purchase of goods is in the course of export or import when it either 
occasions such export or import or it takes place by the transfer of document 
of title to the goods after they have crossed the customs barrier of India.* In 
both these cases the sale or purchase rakes place in the course of import and, 
therefore, is exempted from sales-tax. 

But purchases made within the State by the exporter for the purpose of 
export as well as sales in the State by the importer after the goods have crossed 
customs frontier are not withia the exemption. lo Coffee board. Bangalore v. 
Jt. Commercial Tax Officer * it was held that the sale of coffee by the Coffee 
Board to its registered exporters under terms and conditions prescribed by the 
rules framed by the Coffee Board was not a 'sale in the course of export* within 
the meaning of Article 286 (1) (b) read with section 5(1) of the Central Sales 
Tax Act, 1956, and as such was liable to sales-tax under the Madras General 
Sales Tax Act, 195 9. The Court said that the phrase 'sale in the course of 
export’ comprises three essentials, oamely, (1) that there must be a sale.' (21 that 
goods must actually be exported, and (3) that the sale must be a part and parcel 
of the export. The sale must occasion the export and the word ‘occasion’ is used 
as a verb and means ‘to cause’ or ‘to be the immediate cause of’. The Court’s 
view was that the sale which is to be regarded as exempt from tax is a sale which 
causes the export to take place or is the immediate cause of the export, that the 
introduction of intermediary between the seller and the importing buyer breaks 
the link, for, then and there are two sales, one to the intermediary and the other 
to the importer, and the first sale is not in the course of import, for the export 
begins from the intermediary and ends with the importer. According to the 
Court the test was that there must be a single sale which itself causes the export 
and there was no room for two or more sales in the course of import. The 
Court, therefore, held that though the sales by the Coffee Board were sales for 
export, they were not sales in the course of export. There were two sales 
involved in this export programme, the first sale by the Coffee Board to the 


1. Article 286 (I) (a). 

2. StaieofTrav-Co. v. Bombay Co. Ltd.. A. I. R. J952S. C. 356 ; State of Traw-Co. v. 
S. V. Factory, A 1. R. 1953 S. C. 333. 

3. Article 286 (t) (b). 

4. A. I. R. 1971 S. C. 870. 

5. See Section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act. 1956. 



350 CONSTITUTIONAL Law Of INDIA [Chap. 

exporter and the second sale by the exporter to a foreign buyer which occa- 
sioned the movement of goods, and this latter sale alone was exempt from safcs- 
tax as being a sale in tbe course of export. 

In Benomi Bros. v. Union of India, 1 the petitioner was an importer and 
dealer in non-ferrous metals like zinc, lead, copper, tin, etc. and was on the 
approved list of registered suppliers to the Directorate-General of Supplies 
and Disposals. They used to procure non-ferrous metals from various coun- 
tries. Licences were issued to the petitioner for supply of these metals against 
contracts placed by D. G. S. and D. 

The Court held that for affecting sale made by the petitioner as principal 
to the D. G. S. & D. the petitioner had to purchase, goods from foreign sellers 
and it was these purchase from foreign sellers which occasioned the movement 
of goods in the course of import. No movement of goods took place in 
pursuance to the contract of sale made by the petitioner with D. G. S. & D. 
Tbe petitioner's sale to D. G. S. & D. was distinct and separate from his 
purchases from foreign sellers. The purchases of the goods and import of 
goods in pursuance to the contracts of purchases were, no doubt, for s ale to 
the D. G. S. & D. But it would not follow that the sales or contracts of sales 
to D. G. 5. & D. occasioned the movement of goods in this country. There 
was no privity of contract between D. G. S. & D. and the foreign sellers. The 
foreign sellers did not enter into cootract by themselves or through the agency 
of the petitioners to the D. G. S. & D. There was no obligation under the 
contract on the part of the D. G, S. & D. to procure import licences foT tbe 
petitioner. It was the obligation of the petitioner to obtain the import licence. 
Therefore, even if the contract envisaged the import of goods and their supply 
to the D. G. S. & D. trora out of the goods imported, it did not follow that 
the movement of the goods in the course of import was occasioned by tbe con- 
tracts of sale by the petitioner with D. G. S. & D. 

It was held that sales by the petitioner to the D. G. S. & D. was not a 
'sale in the course of import’ and therefore liablejo be taxed. 

(Hi) Sale or purchase in tbe course of inter-State trade or commerce.— A 
State caimot impose a rax on the sale or purchase of goods which takes place 
in tbe course of ioter-State trade and commerce. The Sixth Amendment to the 
Consliiution now vests exclusive power to tax on sale or purchase of goods in 
the course of inter -State trade and commerce. A sale or purchase of goods in 
the course or inter-State trade or commerce when the sale or purchase occasions 
movement of goods from one State to another or is effected by a transfer of 
documents of title to the goods during their movement from one State to 
another. 

A State cannot impose a tax on sale and purchase of goods declared by’ 
Parliament by law of "special importance” in inter-State trade or commerce. 
In relation to goods of special importance the State-taxing power is subject to 
the restriction imposed by the Parliament. 

Finance Commission 

Ait. 280 provides for the establishment of a Finance Commission. The 
President shall within two years from the commencement of the Constitution 
and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year or at such earlier time as he 
considers necessary constitute a Finance Commission. The Finance Commis- 


A. I. R. 1974 S. C. 1510, 



271 


RELATIONS BE [WEEN TUB UNION AND TUB STATES 


351 


sion shall consist of a Chairman and four other members appointed by the 
President. Parliament may by law prescribe qualifications which shall be 
requisite for appointment as members of the Commission and the manner in 
which they shall be selected. 

In exercise of the powers under Art. 80 (1). Parliament has passed the 
Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1951. It provides that the Chairman 
of the Commission shall be selected from among persons who have had 
experience in public affairs. The other four members shall be selected from 
among persons who, (1) are, or have been, or are qualified to be appointed as 
Judges of a High Court ; or (2) have special knowledge of the finance and 
accounts of Government ; or (3) have bad wide experience id financial matters 
and in administration, or (4) have special knowledge of economics. 

The members of tbe Commission shall hold office for such period as may 
be specified in tbe Presidential Order and shall be eligible for appointment. 
The Commission is empowered to determine its procedure and shall have all the 
powers of a civil court in respect of summoning and enforcing the attendance 
of witnesses, production o! aDy document and requisitioning any public record 
from any court or office. 

Duties of the Finance Commission. -It shall be the duty of the Com- 
mission to make recommendations to the President as to— 

(a) the distribution between the Union and thfi States of the net proceeds 
of taxes which are to be, or may be, divided between them under this Chapter 
and the allocation between the States of the respective shares of such proceeds ; 

(b) the principles which should govern the grants-in-aid of the revenues 
of the States out of the Consolidated Fund of India ; 

(c) any other matter referred to the Commission by the President in the 
interest of sound finance. 

The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall have powers in 
the performance of their functions as Parliament may by law confer on them. 

Art. 281 says that the President shall cause every recommendation of the 
Finance Commission to be laid before each House of Parliament together with 
an explanatory memorandum. 

Inter-Governmental Tax Immunities 

The doctrine of inter-Government immunities was for the first time, 
recognised by the American Supreme Court in the leading case of Mechulloch v. 
Maryland .* The Congress had established a bank in the State of Maryland. 
The State of Maryland levied a tax which Mechulloch, the cashier, refused to 
pay on the ground that a State could not tax an instrumentality of the Central 
Government. The Supreme Court of America held that the State had no 
power to levy a tax on Centre’s property. Latter on tbe rule was applied to 
give immunity to. State properties from Central taxation.’ 

' This doctrine was very strictly* applied in America. However, in the 
latter decisions its scope has been much more restricted. 4 In Australia, the 

J. 4 Wbealon 316 (1819). 

2. Collector >. Day, 1 1 Wall 173 (1870). 

3. Indian Motor Cycle Co. v. U. S., 283 U. S.-570 (1931). 

4. Mclbermg v. Gerhardt, 304 U. S. 40$ (1*1)8) ; South Carolina v 

(1905) , see also New York v. U. S„ 326 U. S. 572 (1616). 


i. U. S.. 190 U. S. 437 



352 ooNsnxuTiOHAL law of India [Chap. 

doctrine is followed on similar lines as in America. In Canada, the doctrine is 
followed in a restricted sense. 

In India, like Canada, the doctrine of mutual exemption from taxation is 
applied in a restricted sense. Its scope has been defined by the constitutional 
provisions. The rule of mutual exemption from taxation has been recognised 
by Art. 285 and Art. 289 of the Indian Constitution. 

Exemption of Union Property from Slate Taxation —Article 285 imposes 
a restriction on the State to tax the property of the Union. Clause (1) says 
that, unless Patliament otherwise ptovides, tbe Union property shall be exempt 
from all taxes imposed by a State or any authority within a State. The word 
‘property’ includes every kind of property, e. g. movable or immovable. 
Clause (2) saves the State’s power to tax the preperty of the Union which were 
taxable by a State under a law passed before the commencement of (he Con* 
stitution, until Parliament by law provides otherwise. 

The rule of immunity from State taxation applies only to the instrumenta- 
lities of the Union of India and not to private bodies. 

Article 2h7 prohibits a State from imposing tax on consumption or sale 
of electricity supplied to the Government of India or utilized for construction, 
maintenance or operation of any railway unless Parliament by law otherwise 
provides. 

Exemption of State property or income from Union Taxation. — Article 289 
exempts tbe property and income of a State from Union taxation. Parliament, 
however, can impose a tax in respect of a trade or business of any kind carried 
on by or on behalf of the Government of a State. However, under clause (3) of 
this Article Patliament may by law exempt any class of business incidental to 
ordinary functions of Government from Union taxation. 

Thus the immunity from Centre’s taxation is given only to property and 
income of a Stale from direct taxes. Immunity is not given from Union’s 
indirect taxes, e. g„ duties of customs and excise. 1 The immunity does not 
extend to commercial interests, assets and income of the State. Thus if a State 
runs roadways or does business in purchasing and reselling of foodgrains, 
etc, it acts as a private trader, businessman or an industrialist. In this capacity 
it does not enjoy any immunity under the Constitution. Parliament may 
provide for taxation of such activities. 

Under Art. 285 the Centre’s property is exempt from all State taxes 
whether it is used for commercial puiposes or governmental purposes ' But 
under Art. 289 such an exemption is not availahlc to the States properly. The 
Union of India can levy tax oa alt kinds of a State property. 



27] RELATION =3 BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE STATES 353 

instrumentalities beyond the scope of express provisions in Arts. 285, 287, 288 
and 289 of the Constitution. 

Borrowing Power (Articles 292-93). — Article 292 gives the Union 
unlimited power to borrow money on the security of the Consolidated Fund of 
India either within or outside. The Union Government can borrow within 
such limits as may defixed by Parliament from time to tim. It can also 
guarantee any debt within such limits. 

Article 293 permits a State subject to any limits fixed by the State Legisla- 
ture to borrow money within the territory of India on security of the Consoli- 
dated Fund of State. The borrowing power of State is thus subject to a 
number of restrictions, a State cannot borrow from outside India. 1 Limitation 
may be imposed by the State Legislature. 

The Government of India may itself extend a loan to the State under law 
passed by Parliament. So long as such a loan or any part thereof remains out- 
standing, no fresh loan can be raised by the State without the consent of the 
Centra! Government.* 


Article 293. 
Article 293 t4). 
Const. 45 



28 

The State Liability 
(Arts. 294 to 300) 

Suits by or against the State. — Article 300 of the Constitution says that the 
Government of India may see or be sued by the name or the Union of India 
and that State Government may sue or be sued by the name of the State. Thus, 
the Constitution makes the Union and the States as juristic persons liable for 
owning and acquiring property, making contracts, carrying on trade or business, 
bringing and defending legal action, just as private individuajs. The legal 
personality of the Union or India, or a Slate of the Indian Union is thus placed 
beyond doubt by the express language of Article 300. 1 2 3 The Government of 
India can be sued “in relation to their affairs in the like cases as the Dominion 
of India might have been sued if this Constitution had not been enacted. The 
position in this respect remains the same as it existed before the commencement 
of the Constitution so long as Parliament does not make a law providing other- 
wise.’ As the Union of India is a legal person it is not necessary to investi- 
gate whether the Government of India was a legal entity before the commence- 
ment of the Constitution. 8 

Liability in contract.— Article 299 authorises the Government of India to 
enter into contract for any purpose subject to the mode and manner provided 
for it in Article 299. A contract is binding on the Government of India if the 
following three conditions are fulfilled : — 

1. it must be expressed to be made by the President or by the Governor 
of the State as the case may be, 

2. it must be extended on behalf of the President or the Governor as 
the case may be, and 

3. its execution must be by such person and in such manner as the 
President or Governor may direct or authorise. 

Failure to comply with those conditions nullifies the contract and renders 
it void and unenforceable. There is no question of estoppel or ratification of 
the provisions of Art. 299 (I) or the Constitution. 4 

The contractual liability of the State under Indian Constitution is the 
same as that of an individual under ordinary law of contracts. The legal posi- 
tion in this respect has not changed under the present Constitution. The lia- 
bility of the State is exactly the same as that of East India Company before 
1858. 

Although the contracts are made in the name of the President he is not 
personally liable in respect of any contract. 


1. Calcutta Corporation v. Director of Rationing, A. I. R. 19S4 Cat 282. 

2. Article 300. 

3. Union of India v. Satyendra Nath, A. L R. J955 Cat 5*1- 

4. Bibat E. G. F. Cooperative Soeiety v. Sipabi Singh, A. I. R. 1977 S. C. 2149. 



THB STATE LIABILITY 


355 


, . ..... tort Article 300 (1) provides that the Government of India 

Liability in tort. A v # p ljke c&Ki lhc Dommion of India, 

may be sued in relation^ its “ Parliament. The Parliament 

5 fe,r ,h,, ' BPK,,s,hesarasas “ ,s, ' d 

berott the commencement or ‘he Constitution 

•Km F«t India Company, and after the Govern- 
Before the Constitution, lh fcrTed lhe Government of India to Her 

ment oflndia Aet, J85S, ... . t h c Secretary of State in Conned were 

acts o'nbeir servants committed in the course of their 

employment. provided that the 

Section 65 of the Govern _ sucd a8 it ^ done against the East 
Secretary of Sttte in Coun » m Government or India Act 1858 was 
India Company. (- ..- Government of India Act, 1915. and as section 

W^flrdSSSSlStaSi Act, 1535. In the present Const, tut, on the 
conesponding provision is . js the p & q. Steam Navigation Co. 

The first leading ease on the P° ^ th . cas= were ihat a servant of the 
Secretary “l s,a, ‘° S J"* {„ ..meg from Garden Reach to Calcutta in a 
plaintiff's (company) *“ Tie accident toot place when the coach 

carriage driven by a pair ottoKe^ * ^ ti which is a O.vtroment Dock- 
vas passing through the. Kidderpore u ^ Dockyard were carrying 

vard Some workmen employed in i _ - • e a stcatn cr. The men cairy- 
a heavy piece of iron for the P“JP“f of ^ he t „ d . When the carriage 

ing the iron-tod were waltiog alo g gave a warning to the men tarty 

of the plaintiff drove up HB Ip ^j. The men carrying the iron 
ing the iron and the coactoau wco^ ;q t jJ„ t tlic a go to the one sideof 
attempted to E« Tried to go to the other side of the toad. The 

the toad while those behind 1 tnei lljt J M arri a gc dose upto them, 
consequence of this was » JT S[ | ing lh e horse and carnage close 

before they had left the “°'' e . f j/ e my dtopped the iron and ran away. The 
them. they, got injoriis to one horse, which sat ltd he 

bdJ&fsntf » 5 »Sr- b » ,bc nts!i8 ““ <>r,he sc "“ u 

.TnrTioved bv the Government of India. . 

employ y Secretary of State for India in Council 

The Supreme Court f^jrjflij^i^eghgence of Government ser- 
was liable for the damages 4 ordinary, employer liable, 

vants.if the neghgenre was such as^' actJ donc j n the eierase of sovereign 
The Court drew a distmrtioi exercise of “non-sovereign power , that is, acts 
power’* and acts done m the emem t* ^ on b y private 

done in the conduct of nndertaki g cr . me liability could only 

persons— individuals without having P me East India Company had a 

wise in case of “non-so 'YWJS° and of tra ding company. The habi- 

a two-fold charaetcr-of sovereign po of its commercial dealings 

I. P. & o. Steam Navigation Co. v. Secretary of Stale for India. 5 Bom. H. C.R 
App. L 



356 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


Chap. 


In the present case, the damage was done to the plaintiff in the exercise 
of non-sovereign function, /. e„ the maintenance of Dockyard which could be 
done by any private individual, without any delegation of sovereign power, and 
hence the Government was liable for the torts of its employees. The Secretary 
of State was not liable for anything done in the exercise of sovereign poweis. 

The above principle has bcea approved and applied by the Supreme 
Court in the following cases. 


In State af Rajasthan v. I'idyavati, 1 2 3 the driver of a jeep owned and main- 
tained by the State of Rajasthan for the official use of the Collector of a dis- 
trict, drove it rashly and negligently while bringing it back from the workshop 
after repairs and knocked down a pedestrian and fatally injured him. As a 
result of the injuries the pedestrian died. His widow sued the State of Rajasthan 
for damages. The Supreme Court held that the State was liable and awarded 
damages. The accident took pbee while the driver was bringing it back from 
the workshop to the Collector’s residence. It cannot be said that he was em- 
ployed on a task which was based on delegation of sovereign or governmental 
powers of the State. His act was not an act in the exercise of a sovereign func- 
tion. The Court said : 

"In fact, the employment of a driver of the jeep car for the use of s 
civil servant is itself an activity which is not connected in any 
manner with the sovereign power of the State at all.” 


The Court approved the distinction made in Steam Navigation Company’s 
case between the sovereign function, and the non-sovereign function of the 
Slate. HoA-ever, Sinha, C. J.. made an important observation in Vidyawati's 
case. His Lordship said that the common law i® nanity rule based oaths 
principle that ’the king can do no wrong’ has no app'ication and validity in this 
cauntry. “There should be no difficulty in holding that the State be as ranch 
lirble for tort and in respect of a tortious act committed by its servant and 
functioning as such, as any other employer. .In India ever since the time of 
East India Company, the savettiga has been held liable to be sued in tort or in 
contract, and the common law immunity never operated in India. Now that we 
have by our Constitution establish a republican form of Government and 
one of the objections is to established a Socialist State there is no justi- 

fication, in principle or in public interest, that the State should not be held 
liable vicariously for the tortious acts committed by its servants 


Tils obscmtioo indicates IbM Ibc Supreme Conn «»1 ofthe Ti,w lhal 
immunity from liability of the State for tortious acts committed by its servants 
when exercising sovereign powers delegated to it cannot be sustained But the 
Conrt expressed its view that in the absence of a law made bv the Parliament 
under Article 2 CO (\) or the Constitution, the law in force today is the law that 
was in force ever since the date of the East India Company. 


In Kojturt Lai v. Stale of V. P., a a person was taken Into custody on 
suspicion of being in possession of stolen property and taken to police station. 
HU property including certain quantity of gold and silver was taken out from 
him and kept in the Malkhana till the disposal of the case. The gold and 
silver was misappropriated by a police constable who fled to Pakistan. The 


1. Stale of Rajasthan ». Vjdyawati. AIR 19S2 SC 9JJ. 

2. Ibid. 

3. AIR 196J SC 1019. 



281 '! M ' TEIE STATZ LIABILITY 3S7 

appellant sued the State of Uttar Pradesh for return of the gold and silver, and 
in the alternative, claimed damages for loss caused by negligence of the Meerut 
police. The State contended that no liability would accrue for acts committed by 
a public servant where such acts were related to the exercise of sovereign power 
of the State. The Supreme Court held that the State was not liable. The Court 
approved the distinction made in the Steam Navigation case between sovereign 
and non-sovereign functions of the State. Gajendragadkar, C. J., said. "If a 
tortious act committed by a public servant gives rise to a claim for damages, 
the question to ask is ; was the tortious act committed by a public servant in 
discharge of statutory functions which are referable to, aDd ultimately based on 
the delegation of the sovereign powers Of the State to such public servant If 
the answer is in the affirmative the action for damages will not lie. On the 
other hand, if the tortions act has been committed by a public servant in the 
discharge of duties assigned to him not by virtue of the delegation of any 
sovereign powers, an action for damages would lie.” 

The Court held that the tortious act of the police officers was committed 
by them in the discharge of sovereign powers and the State was therefore not 
liable for the damages caused to the appellant. The Court said that the power 
to arrest a person, to scarch"hira, and to seize property found with him are 
powers conferred ' on - the specified 'officers by statute and therefore, they are 
powers which can properly be characterised as sovereign powers. 

The Court however made a strong plea for enactment of a legislation to 
regulate and control the claim of the State for immunity on the lines of the 
Crown Proceedings Act of England. 

Although the principle which determines the extent of the vicarious liabi- 
lity of the State for the torts committed by its servants is thus well settled, it 
is by no means easy to apply the principle to particular cases. In modern times 
.the distinction between sovereign and non-sovereign functions has almost been 
obliterated. How difficult it is to draw a line of distinction between these two 
functions of the State can .well be illustrated by some of the cases decided by 
various High Courts. 

Id Satyawatl v. Union of India,' "an Air Force vehicle was carrying hockey 
team to Indian Air Force Station to play a match against a team of Indian 
Air Force. After the match was over, ibe driver W3S going to park the vehicle 
when he caused the fatal accident by his negligence. It was argued that it was 
one of the function of the Union of India to keep the army in proper shape 
and time, and that hotkey team was carried by the vehicle for the physical 
exercise of the Air Force Personnel and therefore the Government was not 
liable,. The Court rejected this argument and held that the carrying of hockey 
team to play a match ean by no process of extension be termed as exercise of 
sovereign power and. the Union of fudra war therefore liable for damages 
caused to the plaintiff. . 

In Union of India v. Sugraial * one Mr. Abdul Majid was knocked down 
by a military truck which was engaged in carrying a machine to the School of 
Artillery. The machine was sent for repairs to a military, workshop and nfter 
repairs it was being transported to the School of Artillery. It is a machine for 
locating enemy guns which was for giving training to military officer*. The 
Government pleader argued that training or army personnel Is a sovereign func- 
tion which in turn requires maintenance of machines, and maintenance 01 


1, A. I. R- »967 Delhi 9S. 

2. A, I. R. fW Bom. 13. 



358 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Cbap. 


machines requires that they should be kept io proper repair, and that work of 
repairing requires its transport from workshop to military school and therefore 
transporting was a sovereign function. 

The Court rejected this argument that every act which is necessary for the 
discharge of a sovereign function involves an exercise of sovereign power. 
Many of these acts do not require to be done by the State through its servants, 
for example supply of food to army which may be transported in trucks be* 
longing to private persons. The Court said that though the transportation of 
the machine from the workshop to the military school was necessary for the 
training of army personnel but it was not Decessary to transport it through a 
military truck driven by defence personnel. The machine could have been 
carried through a private carrier without any material detriment for the dis- 
charge of, by the State of its sovereign function of maintaining army personnel. 
The Court accepted that in certain cases transporting of machine by a military 
truck can be regarded as a sovereign function, e. g. , carrying machine for the 
immediate use of army engaged in active militaty duty. 

In Rooplal v. Union of India,' the military jawans in the employment of 
the Union oC India lifted the drift wood belonging to the plaintiff and carried 
it through military vehicles for purposes of camp fire and the fuel was used by 
them for their requirements. The Court held that the act was done by jawans 
in the coutse of the employment and the Government -was liable for damages. 
Even assuming that the jawans found the wood lying on the river side and 
took them away bona fide thinking that it belonged to the Government, the 
State was liable to compensate the plaintiff when ultimately it was found to 
belong to the plaintiff. Reasoning was that the illegal act in carrying away 
the fire wood could be committed by the military jawaDS by carrying it through 
any other truck which any private person conld do. 

In Baxi Amrik Singh v. Union of India,' an army driver while driving an 
army truck caused accident to the plaintiff. At the time or accident the driver 
was deputed on duty for checking military personnel on duty for the whole 
day. The Court held that the accident was caused in discharge of the soverign 
function of the State because only military personnel could be deputed to check 
the military personnel on duty. It was for this purpose that the army vehicle 
was placed at the disposal of the person deputed for duty and he himself drove 
the vehicle to go from place to place. This function cannot be entrusted to 
private individuals. 

In Slate v. Podmaioch* the plaintiff filed a suit for damages against the 
State of Orissa for injuries caused to him by the Orissa Military Police. The 
fact was that io apprehension of danger of attack on the office of the S. D. O. 
and its properties by an unlawful mob which resorted to violence, there was 
police cordoning in by O. M. P. under the control of supervisory officers and 
magistrates without any orders from the magistrate or higher authorities the 
police personnel assaulted members of the mob as a result of which the 
plaintiff received injnries. The Court held that the injuries caused to the 
plaintiff by the police personnel with a view to disperse the unlawful crowd 
were in exercise of the sovereign function of the State. As the posting of 
police for the protection of its officers and properties was in exercise of the 
delegated sovereign, function, the fact that the police committed excess in dis- 


l. A. I, r. 1972 J. & k. 22 . 
2- 097J) Punj. L. R. 1. 

J.' A. J. r. 1975 Orissa 41. 



28} 


THE STATE LI3BILITY 


359 


charge of their function without authority could not take away the illegal from 
the purview of delegated sovereign function. The State was held to be not 
liable for acts of the police 

In Thangarajan v. Union of India,'* an army driver was deputed for col- 
lecting C0 2 gas from the factory and to deliver it to ship, I. N. S. Jamuaa. As 
a result of rash driving he , knocked down the appellant, a minor boy of aged 
about 10 years. It was held that the accident was caused to the plaintiff while 
the driver was driving the lorry for the purpose of supply of CO a gas to the 
ship, I. N. S. Jamuna, which was in exercise of sovereign function of the State 
for maintaining military purposes. 

However, in view of the peculiar circumstances of the case, the Court 
strongly recommended to the Central Government to make an ex-gratia pay- 
ment of Rs. 10,000 to the appellant. The Court said, "It is cruel to tell the 
injured boy who had suffered grievous injuries and was in hospital for over 6 
months incurring considerable expenditure and has been permanently incapa- 
citated that he is not entitled to any relief as he had tbe privilege of being 
knocked down by a lorry which was driven in exercise of sovereign functions 
of the State”. 

The rule of liability of the State for torts of its servants as laid down in 
the Steam Navigation's case is very outmoded. In the modern age when the 
activities of the State have vastly increased, it is very difficult to draw a distinc- 
tion between sovereign and non-sovereign functions of the State. The increas- 
ed activities of tbe State have made a deep impact on all facts of an indivi- 
dual’s life, and therefore, the liability of the State should accordingly be made 
co*extensive with its modern role of a welfare State and not be confined to the 
era of iaissez faire (individualism), which the P. and O. Steam Navigation’s case 
signifies.® 


J. A. 1. R. 1975 Mad. 32. 

2. Jain, M. P.— Indian Constitutional Law, 1962 edition, p, 568. 



29 

Right to Property 
(Art. 300 -A) 

This new Chapter has hecn added to the Constitution by the (44th Amend' 
men t) Act , 1978. The amendment takes away the right to property as a funda- 
mental right and makes it only a legal right which will he regulated by ordinary 
law. Consequently, Arts. 19(f) and 31 have been deleted. However, Art. 31 
has re-appeared, though in part, as a new Art. 3DD-A under the present Chapter. 

Article 300-A provides that “no person shall be deprived of his property 
save by authority of law'’. 

Thus the only condition to be complied with for the acquisition of 
private property under the new Art. 30O-A will be a law of the Legislature. The 
purpose for which property will be taken away or whether any compensation 
will be paid (both these conditions were necesary , under repealed Art. 31) will 
be determined by the Legislature. 

Tbe effect of the amendment is that for violation of his right to property 
under Art. 300-A a person will not be entitled to invoke the writ jurisdiction 
of the Supreme Court under Art. 32. 

The Janata Government was committed to the electorate for the abolition , 
of the right to property as a fundamental right. 

Tbe abolition of the right to property as a fundamental right has been 
criticised by constitutional Jurists. Mr. H.M. Seervai, an eminent constitutional 
jurist is of opinion that the abolition of the right to property as fundamental 
right would destroy other fundamental rights which, are embodied in the 
Constitution. A party pledged to restore fundamental rights to the people 
cannot derogate a right which is essential for the existence of other valuable 
rights. It is enough to say, be says, that the fundamental right to the freedom 
of speech and expression (which includes the freedom of the press) and freedom 
of association, the freedom to move freely throughout the territory of Indin, to 
settle in any part of India, to carry on bussiness, profession or vocation in any 
part of India would be destroyed if tbe right to property is not guaranteed as a 
fundamental right and tbe obligation to pay compensation for private property, 
acquired for public purpose is not provided for. ■ 

Since Article 31 which dealt with tbe right to property now re-appears as 
a new Art. 300-A, the commentary on the old Article is ‘therefore’ retained. 

Eminent Domain. — Every Government has an inherent right to take and 
appropriate the private property belonging to individual citizen for public 
use* This power is known as Eminant Domain. It is the offspring of political 
necessity. The right rests upon the famous maxim — saius populi est suprema 
lex — which means that tbe welfare of tbe people or the public is the paramount 


1. Seervai. The Emergency, Future Safeguards in tbe Habeas Corpus case. A criticism 

pp. 150, 151. * 

2. Charanjit UI v. Union of India, A. I. R. 1951 S. C. 41 (B. K. Mukerjee, J.). 



29l 


RIGHT TO PROPER!* 


$6l 


law and also on the maxim necessita public major est quam, which means 
“public necessity is greater than private’*. 1 Thus property may be needed and 
acquired under this power for Government offices, libraries, slum-clearance 
projects, public schools, colleges and universities, public highways, public 
parks, railways, telephone lines, dams, draioages, sewers and water systems and 
many other projects of public interest, convenience and welfare. 2 3 4 5 * The exercise 
of such power (compulsory acquisition by State) has been recognised m the 
jurisprudence of all civilised countries as conditioned by public necessity and 
payment of compensation. 8 But the power is subject to restrictions provided 
in the Constitution. In America there are three limitations on the power of 
Eminent Domain- (1) there must be a law authorising the taking of property, 
(2) properly must be taken for public purpose, and (3) just compensation 
should be paid. 

In India, Article 31 imposed similar limitations on this power of Eminent 
Domain. The new Art. 300-A imposes only one limitation on the power of 
Eminent Domain, i. e. the authority of law. 

1, No deprivation of property except by authority of law. 

Article 31 (1) provided that no person shall be deprived of his property 
except by authority of law. This means that the State has authority to take 
away the property of an individual but it can do so only by authority of Jaw. 
Thus Article 31 (1) guaranteed that a person cannot be deprived of his pro- 
party merely by an executive fiat or order. It is only by the exercise of its 
legislative powers that the State can deprive a person of his property. In 
H'azir Cltand v. State of H. P it was held that illegal seizure of goods in 
possession of the petitioner in India under no authority of law at the instance 
of the Jammu and Kashmir police was clearly an infringement of the funda- 
mental right under Article 31 (1). 

The protection of Article 31 (1) extends to citizens as well aliens. But 
Article 31 (1) is not attracted where a person is deprived of his property by 
action of another private person.® 

Copulsory Acquisition : Art. 31 (2).— prior to the Constitution (Fourth 
Amendment) Act, it was as follows : 

(2) No property movable or immovable including any interest in or 
in any company owning commercial or industrial undertaking, 
shall be taken possession of or acquired for public purposes under 
any law authorising the taking of such possession or such acquisi- 
tion, unless the law provides for compensation for the property 
taken possession of or acquired and cither fixes the amount of the 
compensation, or specifies the principles on which and the manner 
in which the compensation is to be determined and given. 

The Fourth Amendment substituted a new clause for clause (2) of Article 
31 and also introduced an entirely new clause (2- A) which was as follows : 

1. Quoted tn Agrawal** fundamental Rights and Constitutional Remediea. Vot I. In 
edition, p. SS4. 

2. Dr. V. N. ShuVM : The Constitution, of India, 1969 Td., r- 1**- 

3 . State of Bihar a. Kameshwar Singh, A. I R. 1932 S. C. 232. 

4. A. l.R 1934 S.C. 415. 

5. P. D. Shamdjuni v. Central Dank, A. I. R. 1952 S. C. 39. 

Const. 46 



362 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA [Chap. 

(2) No property shall be compulsorily acquired or requisitioned for a 
public purpose and save by authority of Jaw which provides for 
compensation for the property so acquired or requisitioned and 
either fixes the amount of the compensation or specifies the prin- 
ciples on which, and the manner in which the compensation is to 
be determined and given ; and no such Jaw shall be called in ques- 
tion in any Court on the ground that the compensation provided 
by that law is not adequate. 

(2-A) Where a law does not provide for the transfer of the ownership 
or right to possession of any property to the State or to a corpora- 
tion owned or controlled by the State, it shall not be deemed to 
provide for the compulsory acquisition or requisitioning of pro- 
perty, notwithstanding that it deprives any person of his property. 

It is to be noted that the words used in unamended Article 31 (2) were 
“taken possession of or acquired" while the words used in amended Article 31 
(2) were ''compulsorily acquired or requisitioned”. 

Article 31 prior to the Fourth Amendment bad been considered in State 
of Wt st Bengal v. Subodh Gopal Bose.' In this case respondent, a purchaser of 
certain property at a Revenue sale, acquired under the Bengal Revenue Sales 
Act, 1859, the right “to avoid and annul all under-tenures and forthwith to 
eject all under-tenants”. In a suit for eviction of under-tenants in exercise of 
that right he obtained a decree. While an appeal against the said decree was 
pending, the Act was amended. The amending Act provided that alt pending 
suits, appeals and other proceedings which had not already resulted in delivery 
of possession, would abate. The respondent challcged the validity of the 
amending Act as abridging the right uoder Article 31 as it made no provision 
for paying compensation to the purchaser. The Court held that clauses (1) and 
(2) should be read together and they deal with the same subject, namely, the 
limitation on the State’s power. The deprivation contemplated in clause (1) is 
not different than the acquisition or taking possession of property referred to 
in clause {1). If a person is “substantially dispossessed”, or if bis right to 
use and enjoy his property has been seriously impaired or the value of the pio- 
peity is materially reduced by the impugned law, it would amount to depriva- 
tion and then compensation must be paid to them. Any law which authorised 
such deprivation must provide for payment of compensation regardless whether 
there was a transfer of title or possession to the Stale or not The Court, 
however, held the law valid on the ground that the abridgement of the right of 
the respondent was not so substantial as to amount to the deprivation of the 
right of the property under Art. 31. 

In Dtvarkadas v. Shoiapur Spinning and Weaving Co., 1 2 the Gover ,ment by 
an Ordinance vested the management of the Shoiapur M.lls in directors 
appointed by the Government because there was a danger of Mill being closed 
down due to mismanagement. The plaintiff, a shareholder of the Company, 
challenged the validity of the Ordinance on the ground that is made bo pro- 
vision for compensation to the shareholders who had been deprived of the 
tight of management and administration of his Company. The Government 
contended that the l3w did not infringe Article 31 (2) because the State had 
not acquired title in property of the Company but possession has been taken 

1. A. I. R. 105* S. C. 92. 

2. A. L^R^954 S. C. 119, followed ia Saghir Ahmad v. Stale of U. P„ A. I. R. 195* 



29] 


BIGHT TO PROPERTY 


363 


over temporarily for ^^V^^p^^^o'ifrt^acccpted^h^^^ontcntion^oMhc 

tetffiKKSS SfSKKp-* un ^ cr Anicie 31 (2). 

„,, i. „r ,«,- decisions in Subodh Gopal and Sholapur Mills’ cases 
The result of the decisio hcther there was transfer of property 

was that compensauon was to be p: .. acquisirion « and taking posses; 

or possesstop to the State o f not. same mcanlDg as the word "deprivation 

sion" >n A".cte 31 (| had = o |0 b privlte property as against 
in Article Jl (D- Arttele 31 g p a person is deprived by possession 

State action, no e I^tate bad to pay compensation even when a mere 
of it. This *cant that .the Stete b ^ Wcaving Com y (Emergency 

regulatory l» w 1,ke 1 , q ^ n cu P rta i!ed the right to property of an individual 
Provisions') much the capacity of the State to regulate 

Tconomic^ffah^of th^couatry specially to .Ws era of na.ton baildtng ' 

Fourth Amendment ^"5. '°Tha d Am eSdme nt rtplS'the words 
out of the decisions in the above ca „ com p „, so ,ily acquired or requrs.lioued . 

taking Poston of or acquired » Anjc f t 31 order to explain few words. 

A new cla U se l2-A) *''as aoo^ provide fo[ lta transfer of the owner- 

It lays down that where a law a v , 0 , h e state or to a Corporal on 

ship Ot , right to poms iion y ' u „ 0 t be deemed to ptovide for the 

requisition of propetty, polw.thsiandtog that tt 
Kve! any P«™n of his property. 

The Fourth sublSs^Clause't!) °prol!ded 

31 were not the same , th^f Drov ided for ‘compulsory acquisition or 
for -deprivation an payable only when ptopeity was c »”’P uls “ , ' lj 
requisition . Compensauo clause (2). Accordmg to clause (2*A) unless 

acquired or requisitioned m t S e ownership or right to possession 
a law did not provide for the i tran*wr c ' qq owned and COD troUed by State it 

of any property to l J e S id f 0 Vthc compulsory acquisition or requisition 
would not be deemed to P ‘ deprived any person of his property under 

of property » olw, ‘ h r S d C S compensation nor there is any lega J obUg»- 
clause (1) he has no right to claim ad equacy of compensation was 

lion on the State to P 3y . ?! d A rt j c j e 31 (2) provided that no prope: rty shall 

made non-justiciable. - A ™ c “, d v Cd e ^p, for a public purpose, and (2) the law 
be compulsorily wcjtnwri C ) h ”“P {hc amount of compensation or specify 
authorising acquisition mu: st c _ anner j Q which the compensation is to be 

Z principles on *kich no^udilaw^haH be called in question in any court 
S' S gto»S tb« compensation provided by .bit law i, not adequate. 

2 Public purpose. 


). Jain, M. F« - 


-Indian Conuiiuiiotul U*, t962 « 1 . 


3t>2 comtmmoNAL law op India (Chap. 

(2) No property shall be compulsorily acquired or requisitioned for a 
public purpose and save by authority of law which provides for 
compensation for the properly so acquired or requisitioned and 
either fixes the amount of the compensation or specifies the prin- 
ciples on which, and the manner in which the compensation is to 
be determined and given ; and no such law shall be called in ques- 
tion in any Court on the ground that the compensation provided 
by that law is not adequate. 

(2-A) Where a law does not provide for the transfer of the ownership 
or right to possession of any property to the State or to a corpora- 
tion owned or controlled by the State, it shall not be deemed to 
provide for the compulsory acquisition or requisitioning of pro- 
perty, notwithstanding that it deprives any person of his property. 

It is to be noted that the words used in unamended Article 31 (2) were 
•’taken possession of or acquired” while the words used in amended Article 31 
(2) were “compulsorily acquired or requisitioned”. 

Article 31 prior to the Fourth Amendment had been considered in State 
oJWtsi Bengal \. Subodh Gopal Bose.' In this case respondent, a purchaser « 
certain property at a Revenue sale, acquired under the Bengal Revenue Sales 
Act, 1S59, the right “to avoid and annul all uoder-tenuies and forthwith to 
eject all under-tenants”. In a suit for eviction of under-tenants ia exercise of 
that right he obtained a decree. While an appeal against the said decree was 
pending, the Act was amended. The amending Act provided that all pending 
suits, appeals and other proceedings which had not already resulted in delivery 
of possession, would abate. The respondent challeged the validity of the 
amending Act as abridging the right under Article 31 as it made no provision 
for paying compensation to the purchaser. The Court held that clauses (1) and 
(2) should be read together and they deal with the same subject, namely, the 
limitation on the State's power. The deprivation contemplated in clause (1) is 
not different than the acquisition or taking possession of properly referred to 
in clause f2). If a person is "substantially dispossessed”, or if his right to 
use and enjoy bis property has been seriously impaired or the value of the pro- 
perty is materially reduced by the impugned law, it would amount to depriva- 
tion and then compensation must be paid to them. Any law which authorised 
such deprivation must provide for payment of compensation regardless whether 
there was a transfer of title or possession to the Stare or not The Court, 
however, held the law valid on the ground that the abridgement of the right of 
the respondent was not so substantial as to amount to the deprivation of the 
right of the property under Art. 31. 

In Dwarkadas v. Sholapur Spinning and tt'eaving Co the Gover ,ment by 
an Ordinance vested the management of the Sholapur M.JIs in directors 
appointed by the Government because there was a danger of Mill being closed 
down due to mismanagement. The plaintiff, a shareholder of the Company, 
challenged the validity of the Ordinance on the ground that it made no pro- 
vision for compensation to the shareholders who had been deprived of the 
right of management and administration of his Company. The Government 
contended that the law did not infringe Article 31 (2) because the State had 
not acquired title in property of the Company but possession has been taken 

I. A. I. R. 1434 S. C. 92. 

t^ 9S4SC - n9 * *" 0 ^ 0,4e< * *° Saghir Ahmad v. Slate of U. P„ A. I. R. 1954 



291 


RIGHT TO PROPERTY 


365 


However, it is interesting to note the history of the dispute over the word 
"compensation” as originally provided by the Constitution. 

Prior to 4lh Amendment 1955— Prior to the Constitution (4th Amend* 
ment) the word ‘compensation* was interpreted as full compensation, i. e. the 
full monetary value of the proprty acquired. Slate of IVest Bengal v. Bella 
Banerjee, 1 is the leading case on the unamended Article 31 (2) . fn this case 
the Government acquired certain land in 1948 UDder a Jaw passed by the 
West Bengal Legislature fo: resettling refugees. The compensation payable 
under the law to the owners of the land acquired was not to be more than 
that its market value on the date of acquisition, that is, December 31st, 1946. 
The Court held the law invalid on the ground that the Government bad fixed 
the rate of compensation arbitrarily which has no relation to (he market value 
of the land on the date of acquisition which might be much more than the 
price fixed. According to Court the word ‘‘compensation" meant “just 
equivalent" that is, full and fair money equivalent, of the property taken. 
What is just equivalent compensation is to be determined by the courts. 

After the 4tb Amendment of 1955 —The decision in Bella Banerjee's case 3 
made it difficult for the Government to take private property for public 
purpose without paying full compensation. Consequently, Article 31 (2) was 
amended by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, which made it 
clear that "no law providing for compulsoy acquis 'lion or requisition of pri- 
vate property shall be called to question in any court on the grouad that (he 
compensation provided by that Jaw is not “adequate". 

After the Fourth Amendment it was hoped that the question of adequacy 
of compensation was settled for ever. But unfortunately this hope was belied 
by the Supreme Court which preferred to stick to its prc-Fourth Amendment 
view. It appeared from its later decisions that so long as the word ‘‘com- 
pensation’’ was there it would be interpreted as meaning full and fair com- 
pensation. 

The amended clause came for consideration in the case of Vajravelu v. 
Sptcial Deputy Collector. 3 In this case the constitutional validity of the Land 
Acquisition (Madras Amendment) Act, 1961. was challenged as discriminatory 
with regard to the issue of compensation. It was contended on behalf of the 
5t3tethat after the (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, no court bad juisdiction 
to question a law for acquisition or requisition because the issue of adequacy 
or inadequacy or compensation has been made a non-justiciablt issue. The 
Court held after the amendment the law of acquisition or requisition of 
poperty is not wholly immune from the scrutiny by the court. Though under 
amended Article a law fixing amount of compensation cannot be questioned 
in any court of law on the ground that the compensation fixed by that law 
was adequate. If, however, the compensation fixed is "illusory” or the 
‘principles' prescribed for determining it were not relevant to the value of 
the property acquired at or about the time when it was acquired, the court 
could declare the law in question invalid as a fraud on the Constitution. 

Thus the Court accepted the meaning of the expression ‘compensation’ 
and ‘principles* as defined by it in Bella Banerjee's case. 4 The court said that 


t. A.I.R. 19S4S. C.I70. 

2. Ibid. 

3. A I.R. I WSJ S. C. 1071. 
A. A I. R. 1954 S. C- im 



364 


coNstnunoNM-iAw or wot a 


[Chap. 


in all countries.’ The concept of public pm pose is not static but dynamic and 
depends on the needs and requirements of the public or community at a given 
ttme and place. The essence of public purpose is the public welfare. Accord- 
ing to Das. }., “whatev r for the general interest of the community as 
opposed to particular interests of the individual must be regarded as public 

purpose 1 2 3 4 5 In the never-ending race the law must keep pace with 

the realities of the social and political evolution of the country as reflected in 
the Constitution. If, therefore, the State is to give effect to these avowed 
purposes of our Constitution, we must regard as public purpose all that will be 
calculated to promote the welfare of the people as envisaged in the Directive 
Principles (Articles 38 to 49) of State Policy, whatever else that expression may 
mean.’ It is not necessary that the property taken must be made available to 
the public at large or that the public benefit, aimed at must apply to whole 
community even if the requisition benefits only certain individuals it may still 
be for a public purpose. 

A few examples will make the subject more clear. Requisitioning of a 
building for accommodation for an individual having no accommodation, and 
requisitioning of a building for a member of the staff of a foreign consulate, 
tVm\rag the status of tenants by cof.Ctiv.wg bhoomidharl rights,* setnbUtaUQa 
and settlement of refugees have been held to be a public purpose. Bat the pro- 
perty of an individual cannot be acquired for private purposes. 

Justiciability of public purpose.— The question whether the deprivation 
of private property is for a public purpose is a justiciable issue. It is tne 
duty of the Court to see that no acquisition of propet ty is allowed for other 
than a purpose. In Slate of West Bengal v. Mrs. Bella Banerjee, 6 the Supreme 
Court held that the declaration of Government is not final on the question of 
public purpose. The Court will determine the matter whether requisition is 
for public purpose or not. 


3. Justiciability ot compensation. 

The third limitation on the power of the State to requisition private 
property for a public purpose was that it must pay 'compensation' to a person 
whose property is taken over. It provided that either it should fix the amount 
of compensation for the property acquired or requisitioned, or it should 
specify the principle on which 3nd the manner in which the compensation is 
to be determined. It was the duty of the Legislature to lay down the 
principles on which compensation was to be given. This power cannot be 
left to the discretion of the Executive. I a State of Rajasthan v. Nath Mat? a 
law which authorised the Government to acquire or requisition the properly 
on payment ot compensation at any rate fixed at its discretion was held 
contrary to Article 31 (2) on tbe ground that it had not laid down any 
principles on which compensation was to be paid. 

. "The 25th Amendment substituted the word “amount” Coe the word 
‘compensation” in Art. 31 (2) of the Constitution. 


1. State of Bihar v. Kameshwar Singh. A. I. R. 1952 S. C. 232. 

2. Moosa v. State of Kerala, A. I. R. 1960 Ker. 355. 

3. Sojravanti v. State of Punjab, A. I. R. 1963 S. C. 151. 

4. State of Bombay v. Bhanji Muoji, A. I- R. 1955 S. C. 41. 

5. State of Bombay v. Alt Gulshan, A. L R. 1955 S. C. 810 

6. A. I.R. WUS.C. no. 

?. A. t R. 1954 S. C. 307. 



29) 


RIGHT TO PROPERTY 


367 


justiciable. If the amount of compensation fixed by the Legislature is not 
liable to be canvassed before the court on the ground that is not a just 
equivalent, the principles of compensation will also not be open to challenge 
on the plea that the compensation determined by the application of those 
principles is not just equivalent. However, the principles may still be challeng- 
ed on the ground that they are irrlevaDt to the determination of compensation 
but not on the plea that what is awarded as a result of the application of 
those principles is not just or fair compensation. It is certainly out of the 
question that adequacy of compensation (apart from compensation which 
is illusory or proceeds upon principles irrelevant to its determination) should 
be questioned after the amendment of the Constitution. This meant that the 
Court will exercise its power only where the principles were “irrelevant” to 
the determination of the compensation or the compensation so determined 
was “illusory”. In the present case, however, the Court held the Act 
constitutional on the ground that the principles fixed by it were “relevant” 
to the determination of compensation and the compensation was not 
illusory. 

It appears strange that the compensation paid at the market rate 
prevalent in 1941 for the property acquired in 1957 was held, in the opinion of 
the Court not to be illusory. 

However, the effect of the Shanlt Lai Mangaldas case did not last long. 
In R. C. Cooper v. Union of India, 1 popularly known as the Bank Nationalisa- 
tion case, the Supreme Court once again reversed the process and virtually 
nullified the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955. In this case, the 
constitutional validity of the Bank Nationalisation Act was challenged on the 
ground that it did not provide for proper compensation within the meaning of 
Article 31 (2). Section 4 of the Act transfeired the undertaking of 14 named 
banks to and vested il in the corresponding new banks. Section 6 (I) provided 
for payment of compensation for acquisition of undertaking and the compensa- 
tion was to be determined in accordance with the principles specified rn the 
Second Schedule. 

The Court said that the principles specified by the law for determining 
compensation cannot be challenged if it is relevant to the determination of 
compensation. But the Court refused to accept that a principle specified by 
Parliament for determining compensation is conclusive. It that view be accept- 
ed Parliament will be invested with a character of arbitrariness. The principle 
specified must be appropriate to the determination of compensation for the 
particular class of property. A method appropriate to the determination 
of value of one class of property may be wholly inappropriate in determining 
the value of another class of property. If several principles are appropriate, 
the court will not dispute the right of Parliament to select one of them for 
“selection must be left to the wisdom of the Parliament”. According to 
the court “the broad object underlying the principles of valuation is to 
award to the owner the equivalent of his property its existing advantages and 
potentialities”. 

The majority said that the compensation should be provided for entire 
undertaking as a unit and not only for some of its components. Tbc value 
of components is not necessarily the value of the entire undertaking especially 
when the property is a going concern with an organised business. No com. 
pensatioa has been paid for certain items of property, such as, the good wjj} 


t. AtR 1970 SC 564. 



366 


CONSTlTimONAL LAW OP tNDIA 


(Chap. 


even after the amendment the provision foe compensation ia Art. 31 (2) » 

•necessary condition’ for making a law of acquisition or requisition. Ib t 
fact that Parliament has used the same expressions, namely, ‘coiflpeaiatioii 
and •principles’ in the Amended Atticle clearly shows that it accepted toe 
meaning of those expressions as defined by the Court in Bella Bantrjee $ case. 

In Union of India v. Metal Corporation ,* the Supreme Court made another 
effort to protect private properly by insisting on payment of adequst 
compensation in case of acquisition or requisition. The Court accepted tn 
meaning of the word ‘compensation* as defined in Bella Banerjee s case that in 
compensation must raeaa just equivalent value of the property acquired to 
this case the Metal Corporation of India (Acquisition of Undertaking' Act. 
1965, was declared to be invalid on the ground that it did not provide tor 
‘compensation’ within the meaning of Article 31(2). The Government had 
acquired the metal corporation uader the above Act. The Act had laid down 
two principles for the determination of compensation 5— 

(1) The used plant, machinery or other equipment at the actual costs, 
and 

(2) those unused and in good condition ftt ' written- down value as 
known in Income-tax law. 

The Court held that the principles were not relevant for determining the 
compensation of the pcoprty on the date of acquisition. Subba Rao, C. J., 
said, “It is common knowledge that there has been an upward spiral in prices 
of the machinery in recent years.” “The cost price of a machine purchased 
about 10 years ago is a consideration not relevant for fixing compensation for 
its acquisition in 1965. The principles must be such a* to enable ascertainment 
of its price at or about the time of its acquisition. Nor the doctrine of written- 
down value accepted in Income-tax law can afford any guide for ascertaining 

the compensation for the used machinery acquired under the Act 

TheCourtsaid that the meaning of Article 31(2) would be clear if the two 
concepts— ‘compensation’ and ‘jurisdiction’ of the court were kept apart. The 
law to justify itself has, to provide for the* payment of a just equivalent to 
the land acquired or lay down principles which will lead to that result. If the 
principles laid down are relevant to the fixation of compensation and are not 
arbitrary the adequacy of the resultant product cannot be questioned in a court 
of law. 

However, in State of Gujarat V Shanli Lai Manga! Jos,' 1 the Supreme Court 
overruled the Metal Corporation case. The case concerned with the validity 
of the Bombay Town Planning Act, 1955. Under the Act, the Government 
issued a notification in 1942 to acquire a plot of land under the town develop- 
ment scheme. The actual acquisition took place in 1957 but the compensation 
was awarded on the basis of market value prevailing in 1942. Hidayatullah, 
C. I., delivering the judgment of the Court on behalf of the majority field that 
the adequacy of the compensation fixed by the Legislature or awarded accord- 
ing to the principles specified by the Legislature far determination is not 

t . A l.R. 1967 S C. 637. (In this case it was held that the written down value of buildings, 
machinery and plant of an undertaking cannot be i»s market value. The written-down 
value means acluil cost for which a capital was acqdned less the depreciation allow- 
ance given in the Income-tax assessments. It is a depreciated value much less than 
the market value) 

1. AIR 1959 SC 634 (overruling Union of India v. Me 13 ' Corporation, AIK |967 SC 



29J 


RIGHT TO PROPERTY 


367 


justiciable. If the amount of compensation fixed by the Legislature is oot 
liable to be canvassed before the court on the ground that is not a just 
equivalent, the principles of compensation will also not be open to challenge 
on the plea that the compensation determined by the application of those 
principles is not just equivalent. However, the principles may still be challeng- 
ed on the ground that they are irrlevant to the determination of compensation 
but not on the plea that what is awarded as a result of the application of 
those principles is not just or fair compensation. It is certainly out of the 
question that adequacy of compensation (apart from compensation which 
is illusory or proceeds upon principles irrelevant to its determination) should 
be questioned after tbe amendment of tbe Constitution. This meant that the 
Court will exercise its power only where tbe principles were "irrelevant” to 
the determination of the compensation or tbe compensation so determined 
was “illusory”. la the present case, however, the Court held the Act 
constitutional on the ground that the principles fixed by it were “relevant” 
to the determination of compensation and the compensation was not 
illusory. 

It appears strange that the compensation paid at the market rate 
prevalent in 1942 for tbe property acquired in 1957 was held, in the opinion of 
the Court not to be illusory. 

However, the effect of the Shanti Lai Mangaldas case did not last long. 
In J?. C. Cooper v. Union of India, 1 popularly known as the Bank Nationalisa- 
tion case, the Supreme Court once again reversed the process and virtually 
nullified the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955. In this case, the 
constitutional validity of the Bank Nationalisation Act was challenged on the 
ground that it did not provide for proper compensation within the meaning of 
Article 31 (2). Section 4 of tbe Act transferred tbe undertaking of 14 named 
banks to and vested it in the corresponding new banks. Section 6 ( 1 ) provided 
for payment of compensation for acquisition of undertaking and the compensa- 
tion was to be determined in accordance with the principles specified in the 
Second Schedule. 

Tbe Court said that the principles specified by tbe law for determining 
compensation cannot be challenged if it is relevant to the determination of 
compensation. But the Court refused to accept that a principle specified by 
Parliament for determining compensation is conclusive. It that view be accept- 
ed Parliament will be invested with a character of arbitrariness. The principle 
specified must be appropriate to the determination of compensation for the 
particular class of property. A method appropriate to the determination 
of value of one class of property may be wholly inappropriate in determining 
the value of another class of property. If several principles are appropriate, 
the court will not dispute the right of Parliament to select one of them for 
“selection must be left to the wisdom of the Parliament”. According to 
the court “the broad object underlying the principles of valuation is to 
award to the owner the equivalent of his property its existing advantages and ‘ 
potential i ties”. 

The majority said that the compensation should be provided for entire 
undertaking as a unit and not only for some of its components. The y 3 j tte 
of components is not necessarily the value of the entire undertaking especially 
when the property is a going concern with an organised business. No com- 
pensatioa has been paid for certain items of property, such as, the good*’" 


I. AIR 1970 SC 364. 



368 CONSIltUIiONAL LAW OP INDIA [Chap. 

aod the value of unexpired portions of leases. The Act provides different 
methods of determining compensation in ‘respect of each such component. 
The methods adopted for valuation of compensation for the undertaxing ate 
irrelevant to the determination of compensation and therefore, the amount 
of compensation determined on the basis of those methods cannot be regarded 
as compensation. “By giving to the expropriated owner compensation in bonds 
which were to mature afier many years, and whose market value an tne date 
of expropriate did not approximate the amount determined as compensation, 
the guarantee uuder Article 31 (2) was violated. 

The decision in the Bank Nationalisation case had been criticised by jurists 
as well as Parliamentarians. Among the critics the so-called socio-economic 
politicians are on the forefront. A feverish attack has been made on the judi- 
ciary, that it suffers from conservatism, that it should interpret the constitu- 
tional provisions to suit the changing needs of society ; that it has stood in the 
way of implementation of Government's much talked about socio-economic 
policies, and retarded for the development of the nation and so on and so 
forth. Some of them have suggested that the power of the Supreme Court 
should be curtailed or the fundamental right to property should be removed 
from the Constitution. 

On the other hand, it has been acclaimed as one of the courageous judge- 
ments given by the Supreme Court. The Mirror, a prominent Ceylonese news- 
paper, while commenting on the Supreme Court’s judgment ia the Banks 
Nationalisation case, has termed it as ‘courageous’ decision. It said “the 
inflexible independence of India’s Supreme Court which nullified Prime 
Minister Indira Gandhi's bank banditoiy glows with added luminance amidst 
the dimming lights of democracy and in the gathering darkness of disintegra- 
tion on the sub-continent”. The newspaper concluded : this (judgment) should 
convince India, as it should Ceylon, that the judiciary is supreme. It is the 
inviolable sacred sanctuary of individual freedom. It must be without the 
slightest tinge or taint not only of corruption but of weakness. For, a weak 
judiciary that grounds before Government is a playing of politicians, is the ruin 
of a nation and the destruction of the people. 1 

While inauguiating the Third Conference of Commonwealth Chief Justices 
in New Delhi, President V. V. Giri said *'A Constitution is not intended to be 
a static document. In a developing society its provisions must lend themselves 
to the changing needs and requirements of the society". No one will deay the 
fact that the Constitution is not a static document and it is necessary from time 
to time to adjust constitutional provisions lo (he changing needs and require- 
ments of the society. Bui such an adjustment is to be brought about by the 
Legislature through an amendment of the Constitution and not by the Judiciary. 
A judge interprets the Constitution ; He does not amend it. Quoting the above 
observation of the President, the Northern India Partita has, in its editorial, 
observed* : Every written Constitution ia a brake on hasty response to the 
“changing needs and requirements of the society” when these "needs and 
requirements are deeply and widely felt, constitutional amendment follow” 
when these reflect sectional moods or political slogans ; the written Constitution 
serves as a dam against misdirected enthusiasm. The role of the judiciary is to 
protect the Constitution in its existing form till it is amended by lawful 

methods .....It would be wrong in principle and dangerous in practice 

to leave to the judiciary the task of interpreting the Constitution, without due 

i 1. See Norihem India Fatnfca, I5ib February, 1970. 

2- See Northern India Pali,V».9‘.b Jammy, isti. 



29 4 


RiGUr to PROPERTY 


369 


regard for its written words, {a accordance with their personal assesment of 
“the changing requirements of the society”. 

Former Chief Justice Mr. M, HidayatuIIab observed that a judge is not 
competent to change the law to suit a particular ideology. If the law 
and provisions of the Constitution speak in certain way a judge should say so 
and not try to interpret it according to any ideology. 1 7 

The Supreme Court has not denied the right of the Parliament to 
nationalise banks. Instead, it has advised the Government to nationalise all 
banks. The Court had only said that the Government shourd pass a law in 
accordance with constitutional provisions. Who will deny the fact that the 
action of the Government was not hasty one and was to suit a particular 
ideology. It is, therefore, submitted that the charge levelled against the Court 
that it impedes "the social programmes the Government” fails. 

As regards the suggestion that the right to properly should be removed 
from the Constitution it would be better to cite another judge of the Supreme 
Court. Mr. Justice Hegde who warned that the end of the right to property 
may make the Government reckless and would enable it to take over “every 
type of property from every one”. He said “history has shown the popularly 
elected Legislatures has also at certain stages in a nation’s life not hesitated to 
destroy the rights of citizens. There are times in a nation’s life when emotions 
takes the place of reason and wisemen’s voices arc muffled.” According to 
him the fundamental rights embodied in the Constitution were nothing but the 
"minimum rights” which an individual in any country should have for living 
in foil life. 

Referring to the popular criticism that some of the provisions of the 
Constitution and the attitudes of the Supreme Court had come in the way of 
implementing the directive principles, he asked “no one has told us why the 
State did not implement the mandates of the Constitution, to have equal pay 
for equal work for both men and women, to have uniform education for all 
children until they complete the age or 14 years and make effective provisions 
for securing the rights to work, to education and to pub’ic assistance in cases 
of unemployment, sickness and disablement and in other cases of undeserved 
want”. A Federal Constitution would become ‘meaningless’ without the court. 
The critics of the court are only obviously those who have no faith in the 
fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution. Today, it was the 
wings of the court that were sought to be clipped but this very precedent might 
be enough in the future for doing away with those of the Legislature. IF mass 
hysteria could be roused against one organ of the State, it could be equally 
roused against the others. In the end of his lecture Mr. Justice Hegde 
• expressed the hope that the Constitution which has also been designed to be 
flexible enough to allow the orientatioa and re-adjustment necessary to 
administrative and judicial process “will be given a fair trial and is not 
condemned for our failures. 1 2 3 

We must agree that there are provisions in the Constitution which enable 
the State to prevent concentration of wealth and to curb exploitation without 
' destroying the fundamental rights of citizens. The State had ample powers 

1. See Northern India PatriVa, dated I8th December. 1971. 

2. Northern Tndia Patrika, 28th March, 1972. The above observation was made by 
Justice Heyde while delivering a lecture on ’• Prospective* of the Constitution” a Part 
of the Babtt Rajendra Prasad Memorial Lecture Series sponsored by the Bharatia 
Vidya Bbawan. 

Const. 47 



36S CONSIltUnONAl. LAW OF INDIA 

and tbe value of unexpited. portions of leases. The Act provides different 
methods of determining compensation in 'respect of each such compoo nt. 
The methods adopted for valuation of compensation for the undertaking are 
irrelevant to the determination of compensation and therefore, the amQ 'J Q , 
of compensation determined on the basis of those methods cannot be regarded 
as compensation. “By giving to the expropriated owner compensation in bonds 
which were to mature afier many years, and whose market value an the date 
of expropriate did not approximate the amount determined as compensation, 
the guarantee uuder Article 31 (2) was violated. 

The decision in the Bank Nationalisation case had been criticised by jurists 
as wtU as Parliamentarians. Among the critics the so-called socio-economic 
politicians are on the forefront. A feverish attack has been made on the judi- 
ciary, that it suffers from conservatism, that it should interpret the constitu- 
tional provisions to suit the changing needs of society ; that it has stood m th® 
way of implementation of Government’s much talked about socio-economic 
policies, and retarded for the development of the nation and so on and so 
forth. Some of them have suggested that the power of the Supreme Court 
should be curtailed or the fundamental right to property should be removed 
from the Constitution. 

On the other hand, it has been acclaimed as one or the courageous judge- 
ments given by the Supreme Court. The Mirror, a prominent Ceylonese news- 
paper, while commenting on the Supreme Court’s judgment in the Banks 
Nationalisation case, has termed it as ‘courageous’ decision. It said “tbe 
ioflexib'e independence of India’s Supreme Court which nullified Prim® 
Minister Indira Gandhi’s bank banditory glows with added luminance amidst 
the dimming lights of democracy and in the gathering darkness of disintegra- 
tion on tbe sub-continent". The newspaper concluded : this (judgment) should 
convince India, as it should Ceylon, that tbe judiciary is supreme. It is the 
inviolable sacred sanctuary of individual freedom. It roust be without the 
slightest tinge or taint not only of corruption but of weakness. For, a weak 
judiciary that grounds before Government is a playing of politicians, is tbe ruin 
of a nation and the destruction of the people. 1 

While inaugurating the Third Conference of Commonwealth Chief Justices 
in New Delhi, President V. V. Girl said **A Constitution is not intended to be 
a static document. In a developing society its provisions must lend themselves 
to the changing needs and requirements of the society”. No one will deny the 
fact that the Constitution is not a static document and it is necessary from time 
to time to adjust constitutional provisions to the changing needs and require- 
ments of tbe society. But such an adjustment is to be brought about by the 
Legislature through an amendment of the Constitution and not by the Judiciary. 
A judge interprets the Constitution; He does not amend it. Quoting the above 
observation of the President, the Northern India Patrika has, in its editorial 
observed* ; Every written Constitution is a brake on hasty response to the 
“changing needs and requirements of the society" when these “needs and 
requirements ate deeply and widely felt, constitutional amendment follow” 
when these reflect sectional moods or political slogans ; the written Constitution 
serves as a dam against misdirected enthusiasm. The role of the judiciary is lo 
protect the Constitution in its existing form till it is amended by lawful 

method* It would be wrong in principle and dangerous iu practice 

to leave to tbe judiciary tbe task of interpreting the Constitution, without due 

i 1. See Norihern India Patrika, 1 5th February, 1970- 

2. See Northern India Patrika, 9th January, I97J. 



29] 


Rioirr to troperty 


371 


ground that i. infringes Articles 14,19 and 31. Clause (b) and 
(c) of Article 39 provide 

good ■» lt . 

. _ _r .he economic system does not result in 

W 'the coaMntration of wealth and means of production to the 
common detriment. 

Article 31-C was the theabove 

empowered the State to whShera law is really for giving effect to 

Jurists had espressed tfejnMg*** i Ameito;m“S er ,=^ro y f'Ar“tiek 

He said that the P to “”°^a'” 1 “o minority and vice verso with spate of defec- 
and majority was converted Into c stMs were empowered to legislate, on 
tions every now and then If It h old enacl confl , c | ln g .legislations 

ffg^SU&SSXSS other subjects contained m the Directtve 

"haw Commission ,».d .also 

had suggested that «! ?,i5?39 flO a^d B 39 (c) But the Government did not 
within the scope £ c Law Commission. 

accept t esugg rv wide oowers to the Government which could be 

This Article gave Knjbody in the garb of giving effect to the 

used to acquire .any property y Arti y le 39 without giving any compen- 

oolicy contained in clause ( b > ° r aivine effect to the State policy for 
sation. While, nobody w ould object to pv.ng^en ^ ^ ^ P ub d 

securing the prujaplM sjonM aWs s0 that oo Government can with an 
that such laws should 1 ” ” gi s property wilhout payment of compensa- 

ulterior motive deprive a person wo < V to the Government to deprive 
tion. The amendment gave untett P , 0 j compensation and also shuts 

a person of his.property v>uuou, p , „ f ^ |b( . ]a „ lcsl! . d by the 

out the doors of the i eottstto 6« > b of j[ rIid f 31 , c of the 25th Amendment 

Judiciary. Fortunately, the second^ |he Fundamrn ,al Rights case. 

was sttnelt down b, the Supmm. k „„„„ as the FmuWttu! 

In Krshsamnd v. *f“' e f(S,y 0 r (25th Amendment) Act, inter aha, was 

C '“S 

6«d by it or determined in accordance 

, Northern India PatriVs, 8th November, 

{. I. R. 1973 S. C. 1461. 



370 


COtMtltUIlONM. LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


m India to make laws to bring about all agtariao reforms unhampered by 
fundamental rights. 

Despite jurists' opinions against it, the Government passed the Constitu- 
tion (25th Amendment) Act, 1971. This Act, according to the Government, 
was passed to remove the difficulties created by the decision of the Supreme 
Court in the Bank Nationalisation case. 

The Constitution (25th Amendment) Act, 1971. — After this amendment the 
language of clause (2) of Art. 31 stood as follows : 

“No property shall be complsorily acquired or requisitioned save for 
a public purpose and save by the authority of a law which provides 
for acquisition or requisitioning of the property for an amauot 
which may be fixed by such law or may be determined in accord- 
ance with such principles and given in such manner as may be 
specified in such law ; and no such law shall be called into question 
in any court on the ground that the amount so fixed or determined 
is not adequate or that the whole or any part of such amount is to 
be given otherwise than in cash : 

Provided that in making any law providing for the compulsory acquisi- 
tion of any property of an educational institution established and 
administered by a minority, referred to in clause (1) of Article 30, 
the State shall ensure that the amount fixed by or determined 
under such law for the acquisition of such property is such as 
would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under that 
clause. 


(2-B) Nothing in sub-clause (f) of clause (1) of Article 19 shall affect 

any such law as is referred to in clause (2), 

(31-C) Notwithstanding anything contained in Article 31 no law giving 
effect to the policy of the State towards securing the principles 
specified in clause (b) or clause (c) of Article 39 shall be deemed 
to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes away 
or abridges any of the rights conferred by Article 14, Article 19 
or Aiticle 31 ; and no law containing a declaration that it is for 
giving effect to such policy shall be called in question in any 
court on the ground that it does not give effect to such policy : 

Provided that where such law is made by the Legislature of a State, the 
provision of this Article shall not apply thereto unless such law, having been 
reserved for the consideration of the President, has received his assent. 

The changes brought about by the amendment may be summed up as 
follows : 


(1) It replaces the word "compensation” by "amount” thu3 barring 
the courts effectively and finally from going into the adequacy of 
the payment made for the acquired property. Under this Article 
the State can deprive a person of his property without paying any 
compensation. Of course it has to pay some amount which may 
he only nominal, but the court will not be able to go into the 
question whether the amount so fixed is adequate or not. 


(2) The new Article 31-C empowers the Parliament as well as State 
Legislatures to enact laws towards securing the principles specified 
in Article 39 (b) and (c). Such laws cannot be challenged on the 



291 


MfiHl tO FXOFER7Y 


373 


■12nd Amendment Act, 1976.— This amendment amended Art. 31-C 
again and widened its scope so as to cover all directive principles. 
Article 31-C as inserted by the Constitution (25th Amendment) Act, 1971, 
gave precedence only two directive principles mentioned in Article 39 (b) and (c) 
over fundamental rights. The Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 gives 
precedence to all directive principles over the fundamental rights of citizens. 
The effect of the (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976, is that a law passed by Parlia- 
ment and the State Legislatures for giving clfcct to any of the directive prin- 
ciples cannot be challenged on the ground that it is inconsistent with or takes 
away or abridges the rights conferred by Articles 14, 19 and 31 of the Consti- 
tution. 

State enacted Compulsory acquisition Laws. — Clause (3).— This clause was 
an additional restriction on the power of the State making laws for compulsory 
acquisition of private property io addition to the two restrictions on such 
laws— public purpose and compensation. According to this clause no such law 
made by the State Legislature shall have effect unless it has received the assent 
of the President. 

Exception to Article 3f (2).— Clause (4) of Article 31 deals with pending 
Bills in a State Legislature relating to acquisition of property by the State at the 
commencement of the Constitution. If such a Bill is passed by the Legislature 
and assented to by the President it is immune from the compensation clause 
of Article 31 (2). This means that validity of such a law cannot be questioned 
on the gtound that it docs not provide for compensation or is not for a public 
purpose. It is to be noted that such a law can be challenged on the ground 
that it violates any other provisions of the Constitution. In Kames/m-ar Singh 
v. State of Bihar, ' the Patna High Court held that the Bihar Land Reforms 
Act, 1951, contravened Article 14 for the classification of Zamindars for the 
purpose of payment of compensation was found to be discriminatory. The deci- 
sions in Kameshvar Singh’s case, led to the addition or Articles 3i-Aand3I-B 
by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, placing certain Acts and 
Regulations beyond the challenge that they were inconsistent with or took 
away or abridged any of the rights conferred by any provision of Part III of the 
Constitution. 

Article 31 (6) saved the validity of certain existing laws enacted by a 
State Legislature within 18 months before the commencement of the Consti- 
tution, provided they were submitted to the President within three months from 
the commencement of the Constitution for the certification of the President 
and were certified by the President 

Clause (5) (a) of Article 31 saved from the operation of Article 31 (2) 
existing laws other than a law to which the provisions of clause (6) apply. 
Clause (5) (b) saves future law made for (a) the purposes of imposing or 
levying any tax or penally, (b) promotion of public healrb or the prevention of 
danger to life or property, aDd (c) in pursuance of any agreement entered into 
between the Government or India and the Government of any country relating 
to evacuee property. 


I. A. I, JL 1951 Pat. 91. 



372 


C0NSI1TUTI0NAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Chap. 


with prinicples specified in such law is not adequate or not 
cash. Thus the new clauses by substituting the word amount 
for the word “compensation” finally makes the adequacy of • 
pensatioo a non-justiciable issue which bad hitherto been the m 
bone of contention between the Judiciary and the Legislature. 

Although all the 13 judges were unanimous in upholding the 
the above clauses however they differed on the question whether the la b 
the amount or laying down the principles for the determination of amou 
the acquired property is justiciabe or not. 


The majority held that amount fixed or determined must have a reaso - 
able relationship to the value of the property acquired. If the amount n%ca (j 
‘illusory* and has no relation to the property sought to be acquired or requisi- 
tioned the courts can strike down such a law as invalid. Hegde and Mukerjea, 
JJ., observed that the new substituted Article 31 (2) did not destroy the right 
to property because — 

(a) tue fixation of ‘amount* under that Article should have reasonable 
relationship with the value of the property acquired or requisi- - 
tinned ; 

(b) the principles laid down must be relevant for the purpose of arriv- 
ing at the “amount” payable io respect of the property acquired or 
requisitioned ; 

(c) the amount fixed should not be illusory ; and 


(d) the same should not be fixed arbitrarily. 


Whether “amount” fixed bad been fixed arbitrarily or was illusory or 
the principles laid down for determining the amount was relevant to the 
subject-matter of acquisition or requisition at the time when the property if 
acquired or requisitioned are open to judicial review. But it is not open for the 
court to consider whether the amount fixed or to be determined on the basis of 
principles laid down is adequate. Though the adequacy of amount fixed or 
determined on the basis of the principles laid down for determining the 
amount is not justiciable yet if what works out after applying these principles 
is arbitrary or illusory the court will Interfere. 


As regards Article 31-C the majority held that the first part of Arlicle 
31-0 is valid. The first part of Article 31-C provides that a law giving effect 
to the principles specified in clauses fb) and (cj of Article 39 shall not be 
questioned on the ground that it is inconsistent with or takes away or abridges 
the rights conferred by Articles 14, 19 and 31. The second part, which provides 
that “no law containing a declaration that it is fox giving effect to such policy 
be - called in question in any court on the ground that it does not give effect to 
such policy” is invalid. According to Mr. Justice Khanna the judicial review 
vs the basic structure of the Constitution and the txclusitm by the Legislature, 
including a State Legislature, of even that limited judicial review strikes at the 
basic structure of the Constitution. The Legislature has been made the final 
authority to decide whether the tax made by it is for the objects mentioned in 
Article 31-C The vice of second part of Article 31-C lies m the fact that even 
if the law enacted is not for the objects mentioned in Article 31-C the declaia- 
tion made by the Legislature precludes a party from showing that the law is not 
for that object and prevents a court from going into question as to whether 
the Jaw enacted is really for the object. 



30J 


FREEDOM OP TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE 


375 


In India the Constitution itself lays down restrictions on Article 301. 
The restrictions are contained in Articles 302 to 305. This is necessary 
because no freedom is ‘absolute’ and cveD in Australia the freedom is not 
‘absolute’ but ‘regulated’ and ‘relative’. 

Article 301 applies not only to interstate trade but also intra-State trade, 
commerce and intercourse. Thus Article 301 will be violated whether res- 
trictions are imposed at the frontier of a State or at any stage prior or subse- 
quent. The freedom guaranteed by Article 301 is freedom from all restrictions, 
except those which arc provided for in the other provisions of Part XU, i. e. 
Articles 302 to 305. The freedom guaranteed by Article 301 is in the widest 
terms and applies to alt forms of trade, commerce and intercourse. It is 
subject only to restrictions specified in Articles 302 to 305. These provisions 
clearly show that the guarantee under Article 301 connot be taken away by 
an executive action.* Restrictions from which the freedom is guaranteed should 
be such restriction as directly and immediately restrict the free-flow of move- 
ment of trade and not from incidental or indirect restriction. 3 4 

The word ‘free' in Article 301 does not mean freedom from regulation. 
There is a clear distinction between laws interfering with freedom to carry out 
the activities constituting trade and laws imposing rules of proper conduct or 
other restraints for the due and orderly manner of carrying out the activities. 
This distinction is kuown as regulation. The woid ‘regulation’ has no fixed 
connotation. Its meaning differs according to the nature of the thing to which 
it is applied. 

A purely regulatory and compensatory Jaw cannot be regarded as viola- 
tive of the freedom of trade and commerce. Such Jaws are intended merely to 
regulate trade and commerce, they tend to facilitate, and not restrictor res- 
train freedom of trade. Thus, such measures as traffic regulations, licensing 
of vehicles, marketing 3 nd health regulations, price control, prescribing mini- 
mum wages arc purely regulatory measures. Likewise, a law which levies a 
tax or toll for the use of a road or bridge is not a barrier or burden on trade 
but in reality helps the free-flow of trade by enabling the provision of a more 
convenient and less expensive route. Such compensatory taxes are no hind- 
rance to any such freedom of trade so long as they are within reasonable 
limits ; if the amount of such taxes are unduly high it cettainly would hamper 
trade. In this connection, the Court pointed out that the distinction between 
•freedom’ in Article 301 and •restriction’ in Articles 302 and 304 must be kept 
in mind, and that which, in reality facilitates trade cannot be a restriction while ' 
that which actually hampers trade will be a restriction. 1 2 

In State of Mysore v. H. Sanjeevlah * the Government made a rule under 
the Mysore Forest Act, 1900, banning movement of forest produce between 
sunset and sunrise. The Supreme Court held tbe rule void as it was not a 
‘ragulatory’ but ‘restrictive’ measure which infringes the right guaranteed under 
Article 301. 

In Atiabari Tea Co. v. State of Assam * the validity of the Assam Taxa- 
tion (or Goods Carried by Roads or Inland Waterways) Act of 1954 was 

1. District Collector, Hydrabad v. Ibrahim & Co., A. I. R. 1970 S. C. 1255. 

2. Automobile Transport v. State of Rajasthan, A. 1. R. 1962 S. C. 1406. 

3. A. I. R. 1967 S. C. 1189. 

4. A. I. R- 1951 S. C. 232, Sioha, C. J.. gave a dissenting judgment. He held that 

taxation simpliciter as opposed to discriminatory taxation was not within Article 30J. 



30 


Freedom of Trade, Cd^merce 

and. Intercourse 

(Arts. 301 to 307) 

In all federations an attempt is made through constitutional provisions to 
create and preserve a national economic fabric to remove and prevent Ukm 
brriers to economic activity, to remove the impediments in the way of inter- 
state trade and commerce and thus to make the country as on single econo- 
mics unit so that the economic resources of all the various units nmy be utilized 
lo the common advantage of all. 1 

The object of such provisions in a Federal Constitution.— The framers of 
the Indian Constitution were fully conscious of the Importance of maintaining 
the economic unity of the Union of India. Free movement and exchange oJ 
goods throughout the territory or India was essential lor the economic WMy « 
the couatry which alone could sustain tnc progress of the country. Prior w 
the integration o f India and the new Constitution there were in existence a 
large number of Indian States which in exercise of their sovereign powers, han 
created customs barriers between themselves and the rest of India, thus hiaaer- 
ing at several points which constituted the boundaries of those Indian States, 
the free-flow of commerce. Thus the main object of Article 301 was obviously 
to breakdown the border barriers between the States and to create one unit 
with a view to encouraging the free-flow or stream of trade and commerce 
throughout the territory of India. 2 3 

_ Article 30 1 of the Constitution of India declares that trade, commerce 
and intercourse throughout the territory of India shall be free. Article 301 
of the Indian Constitution is modelled on section 92 of the Australian Cons- 
titution which says that "trade and commerce and intercource among the 

States whether by means of internal carriage or ocean navigation, shall be 
absolutely free. In its historical context this section was intended to abolish 
State custom barriers. But as a result of judicial decisions, it applies to both 
the Commonwealth as well a3 the States. This was recognised in the deci- 
sion of James v. Commonwealth af Australia? in which a Commonwealth 
Statute requiring a licence for inter-State shipments ol dried fruits, was dec- 
lared unconstitutional by the Privy Couacil. But the freedom in India is wider 
thaD that in Australia under section 92 while section 92 refers to inter-State 
trade only. Article 301 includes both the freedom of inter-State and intra- 
State, /. e., within the territory of State trade and commerce Thus it imposes 
a restriction on the legislative power of both parliament and the State 
- Legislature. The presence of word 'absolutely free’ in Australian Constitution 
presented many difficulties in that country. Trade and commerce could not 
be regulated by the Centre. The restriction was to be spelled out by the 
Courts. 


1. Jain. M. P. : Ind'ao Constitutional Law. 

2. Atiabari Tea Co. Ltd. v. State of Assam, A. I. R. 1961 S C. 232. 

3. (1936) A. C. Sit. See atso Bank Nationalisation ease, (1950) A, C. 235. 



301 FREEDOM dp 1 RADS, COMMERCE AND INfBRCOURJB ill 

conferred by the legislative entries relating to trade and commerce or produc- 
tion, supply and distribution of goods, but also to all laws including tax laws. 

_ (4) Only those laws whose direct and immediate effect is to inihibit or 
restrict freedom of trade or commerce will come within the mischief of Article 


(5) Laws which are merely regulatory or which impose purely compensa- 
tory taxes, and hence intended to facilitate freedom of trade, are outside the 
scope of Article 301. 1 2 

In G. K. Krlthna v. State of Tamil Nadu* the petitioner challenged the 
validity of a Government Notification under the Madras Motor Vehicles Taxa- 
tion Act, 1931, enhancing motor vehicles tax on omnibuses from Rs. 30 per 
seat per quarter to Rs. 100 per scat per quarter on the ground inter alia that 
the lax imposes restriction on the freedom guaranteed by Article 301. He claim- 
ed that the tax is neither compensatory nor regulatory in character and 
therefore it is a restriction on the freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse, 
and as the Notification is not a law passed with the previous sanction of the 
President, it would not be saved by Article 301 (b). On behalf of the Govern- 
ment St was claimed that this measure was taken with a view to avoid unhealthy 
competition between omnibuses and regular stage-carriage buses and to put 
down the misuse of omnibuses. 

The Supreme Court held that the tax on contract carriages imposed by 
the Government Notification is compensatory in nature and could not there- 
fore restrict the freedom guaranteed in Article 301. The Court said that 
regulations like rules of traffic facilitate freedom of trade and commerce, where- 
as restrictions impede that freedom. The collection of toll or tax for the use 
of roads, bridges or aerodromes, etc. do not operate as barriers or hindrance to 
trade. For a tax to become a prohibited tax, it has to be a direct tax, ihe 
effect of which is to hinder the movement p3rt of the trade. If the tax is 
compensatory or regulatory, it cannot operate as a restriction on the freedom 
of trade and commerce. The petitioners submitted that the impugned tax was 
not a compensatory tax as it included the cost of construction of new roads 
also. He argued that it is only for the use of the road in existence that the 
vehicle tax can be levied. The Court held, ‘a compensatory tax' is based on 
the nature and the extent of the use made of the roads as, for example, a 
mileage or ton mileage charge or the like, and if the proceeds are devoted to 
the repair, upkeep, maintenance and deprivation of the relevant roads and the 
collection of the exaction involves no substantial interference with the move- 
ment. The very idea of a compensatory tax is service more or less commen- 
surate with the tax levied. No citizen has a right to engage in trade or busi- 
ness without paying for the spacial service he receives from the State, that is 
part of the cost of carrying on the business. The motor vehicles require , for 
their safe, efficient and economical use, roads of considerable width, hardness 
and durability ; the maintenance of such roads will cost the Government 
money. The users of public motor vehicles stand in a special and direct 
relation to such roads, and derive a special and direct benefit from them, and 
therefore it does not seem unreasonable that they should be called upon 
to make a special contribution to their maintenance over and above their 
general contribution as taxpayers of the State. The enhanced tax is therefore 
valid. 


1. Subramanbm, N, A.— Case-law on Ihe Indian Constitution, 1969, p. J26. 

2. A.I.K. J975 S. C. 583. 

Const 48 



376 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Chap. 


challenged on the ground that it violated Article 301 of the Constitution and 
was not saved by Art. 304 (b). The petitioner carried on the business of 
growing tea and exporting it to Calcutta via Assam. While passing through 
Assam the tea was liable to tax under the said Act. The Supreme Const ht.4 
that the impugned law undoubtedly levies a tax directly and immediately on 
the movements of goods and, therefore, came within the purview of Article 301. 
The Act was, therefore, held void. The Court said that taxes may and do 
amount to restrictions they directly and immediately restrict trade. In the instant 
case, the tax undoubtedly affected the free -flow of trade. Imposition of a duty 
or tax in every case would not be tantamount perse loan infringement of 
Article 301. Only such taxes or restrictions which directly or immediately 
impede the ftee-flow of trade, commerce and intercourse would fall within the 
purview of Article 301. A tax may in certain cases, directly or immediately, 
restrict or hamper the flow of the trade, but every imposition of tax does not 
do so. Every case must be judged on its own facts and in its own setting of 
time and circumstances. 1 * 

Such taxes could only be validly levied if the requirements of Article 304 
(b) are satisfied, i. e. the previous sanction of the President before the State 
enacts such a law. This is a safeguard to ensure that the economic uaity of 
the country is not disrupted by the State Legislature. In the present case, the 
requirements of Article 304 (b) had not been complied with. The Court said 
that the freedom guaitnteed by Article 301 would become illusory if the 
movement, transport or the carrying of goods was allowed to be impeded, 
obstructed or hampered by taxation without satisfying the requirements of 
Articles 302 to 304. 

. In Automobile Transport Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan , 8 the appellants 
challenged the validity of the Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951, 
inter alia, as violating An. 301. The State Government imposed a tax on all 
motor vihicleS used and kept within the State of Rajasthan. The Court 
held the tax valid as they were only regulatory measures imposing compensa- 
tory taxes for facilitating trade, commerce and intercourse The direct and 
immediate reduction test laid down in Atiabari’s case was affirmed by the 
Court with a clarification that regulatory measures imposing compensatory tax 
do not come within the purview of the restrictions contemplated in Article 301 
and therefore such measures need not comply with the requirement of provi- 
sions of Article 304 (b). The effect of the majority decision in this case is that a 
compensatory tax is not a restriction upon the movement part of trade and 
commerce. 

The majority judgment in the Atiabari Tea Co.'s case r^ad with the 
majority judgment in the Automobile’s case lead to the following principles 
relating to Article 301 : 

(1) Article 301 assures freedom of inter-State as well as intra-State trade, 
commerce and intercourse. 

(2) Trade, commerce and intercourse have the widest connotation and 
take in movement of goods and persons. 

(3) The freedom is not only from laws enacted in the exercise of the powers 


1. State of Kerala v. Mother Provincial, A. 1. R. i$70 S. C. 2079. 

1 ilisc”?!. 0 ' ■«». followed loSM. v. Labanya Probha, A. 1 R. 



30) 


-FREEDOM OF TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE 


379 


the question whether an Act providing for State monopoly in a particular 
trade or business conflicts with the freedom of trade and commerce, guaranteed 
by Article 301, but left the question undecided. Article 19 was amended by 
the Constitution (First Amendment) Act id order to take out such State 
monopolies out of the purview of Aritcle 19 (I) (g). But no corresponding 
provision was added to Article 305. It appears from the judgment of the 
Supreme Court that in spite of such an amendment a law introducing such 
State monopoly might have to be justified before the Courts as being ‘in the 
public interest’ under Article 301 or as amounting to a ‘reasonable restriction’ 
under Article 306 (b). 

But the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act now makes existing laws 
and future laws providing for State monopoly in trade immune from attack 
on the ground of infringement of Articles 301 and 303. 

Article 307 empowers Parliament to appoint such authority as it consi- 
ders appropriate for carrying out purposes of Articles 301, 302, 303 and 304. 
It can confer on such authorities such powers and duties as it thinks necessary. 



378 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


IChap. 


Restrictions of Trade and Commerce. — Article 301 is subject to tbe restric- 
tions imposed under Articles 302 to 305 : 

(1) Parliament’s power to regulate trade and commerce in tbe public 
interest.— Article 302 authorizes Parliament to impose such restrictions on the 
freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse between one State and another or 
within any part of the territory of India as may be required in the public 
interest. The question whether a restriction imposed by Parliament by law » 
in the public interest or not is a justiciable issue. In that case Parliament is 
given the sole power to decide what restrictions can be imposed in the public 
interest as authorized by Article 302.* It has been held that restrictions 
imposed on tbe movement oF grain under the Defence of India Rules are in the 
interest of general public.* 

The power of Parliament under Article 302 is limited by Article 302 (')• 
Article 303 (1) provides that Parliament shall not have power to make any law 
giving any preference to any one State over another by virtue of any Entry 
relating to trade and commerce in any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule. 
But under clause (2) of this Article the Parliament may, however, discriminate 
among States if it is declared by a law that is necessary to do so for the 
pupose of dealing with a situation arising from scarcity of goods in any part 
of the territory of India. The question whether there is a scarcity of goods 
in any part of India is for the Parliament to decide. 

(2) State’s power to regulate trade and commerce.— Article 304 (a) empowers 
the States to impose any tax on goods imported from other State if similar 
goods in the State are subject to similar tax so as not to discriminate between 
goods so imported and goods manufactured or produced in that State. In Slate 
of Madhya Pradesh v. Bhailal Bhai , 1 2 3 4 5 a State law imposed sales tax on imported 
tobacco but locally produced tobacco was not subject to such sales-tax. The 
Court invalidated the tax as discriminatory. 

Clause (2) of this Article authorizes the State to impose such reasonable 
restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse as may be 
required in tbe puplic interest. But no bill or amendment for this purpose 
can be introduced in the Legislature of State without the previous sanction of 
tbe Parliament. A law passed by a State to regulate inter-State trade and 
commerce must satisfy the following three conditions under Article 304 
lb)— (1) previous sanction of the President must be obtained ; (2) tbe law must 
be in the public interest ; and (3) restrictions imposed by such a law must be 
reasonable. From the above it is obvious that Parliament has been vested 
with wide powers to regulate trade and commerce. The State power is 
subordinate to the Parliament regulatory measures. A State cannot enact 
regulatory laws without the sanction of the President. In the Atiabari's case,* 
the State tax on the movement of goods was held invalid also on the ground 
that it was passed without the previous sanction of the President. 

(3j Savings of Existing Laws. — Article 305 saves existing laws and laws 
providing for State monopolies in so far as the President may by order other- 
wise direct. In Saghir Ahmad v. Stale of U. P., 5 the Supreme Court raised 

1. Atiabaii Tea Co v. Slate of Assam, A. 1. R. 1961 S. C. 232. 

2. Sutajmal Roopchand & Co. v. State of Rajasthan, A. I. R. 1967 Raj. 104. 

3. A.I.R. 1964 S. C. 1006. 

4. A. I. R. 1961 S.C.232. 

5. A. L R. 19J4 S. C. 728. 



30) -FREEDOM OF TRADE, COMMBRCB AND INTERCOURSE 379 

the question whether an unde and°commerce, guaranteed 

trade or business conflicts with the f . . , d Article 19 was amended by 

by Article 301, but left the quest ; n order to take out such State 

the Constitution (First Amendment) But no corresponding 

monopolies out of the Punjiew f the judgment of the 

provision was added to Article am. vv ndment a law introducing such 

Supreme Court that m spite of thc Courts as being ;in the 

o^—iog .0 . *•««. rrr.net, on' 

under Article 306 (b). . 

■ ■ Amendment) Act now makes existing laws 

But the Constitution (Fourth A ° 5n trade immune from attack 

and future laws providing J 0 '- JSes 301 and 303. 

It can^coni^r on SVXrito.ScTporvcrs and du.ier ar it rhinhr nrcerrar,. 



31 

Services under the Union, 
and the States 
(Arts. 303 to 323) 

While the independence of our country, the responsibilities of the services 
have become onerous. They may make or mark the efficiency of the machinery 
of administration, a machinery so vital for the peace and progress of the 
country. A. country without an efficient civil service cannot progress inspite 
of the earnestness of the people at the helm of affairs in the country. What- 
ever democratic institutions exist, experience has shown that it is essential to 
protect the public services as far as possible from political or personal 
influence. 1 

Recruitment and Regulation of Conditions of Services.— Article 309 
empowers Parliament aad the State Legislatures to regulate the recruitment 
and the conditions of service of the public services and posts under the Onion 
and the States, respectively. Until this was done, the President and the 
Governors may make rules for regulating the recruitment and conditions of 
services. The Constitution itself provides for the creation of the Public Service 
Commission for the Union and the States to assist in the recruitment of the 
public services. 

The opening words of Article 309 “subject to provisions of the Consti- 
tution” make it clear that the law-making power of Legislature and the rute- 
making power of the Executive, must not contravene any provision of the 
Constitution. If any law or rule made under Article 309 for regulating the 
recruitment and conditions of services of civil servants, contravene and of 
the fundamental rights aad particularly Article 14,* Article 1 5. a Article 16, 4 
Article 19 or Article . 1 1 , B Article 32,® it would be unconstitutional 

The Doctrine of Pleasure. — In England, the normal rule is that a civil 
servant of the Crown holds his office during the pleasure of the Crown. His 
service can be terminated at any time by the Clown without assigning any 
reason. _ Even if there is a contract of employment between the Crown, the 
Crown is not bound by it. In other words, if a civil servant is dismissed from 
service he cannot claim arrears of salary or damages for premature termination 
of his service. The doctrine of pleasure is based on public policy. 

Article 310 of the Indian Constitution incorporates the common law doc- 
trine of pleasure. Article 310 expressly provides that all persons who ace mem- 
bers of the Defence Services or the Civil Services of the Union or of All-India 
Services hold office during the pleasure of the President. Similarly, members 


1. P. Suhbaraya — Constituent Assembly Debates, p. 962. 

2 - P Singh al A ti f h R V 'l963S a C 9lf' A ' L R * 1958 S ‘ C ‘ 252 ; SU “ of Pun S* b 

3. All-tndia Station Masters’ Ai*ociatioa v- General Manager, A. I. R. i960 S . C. 384 . 

4. General Manager, S. Rlj. v. Raogachari, A. I. R. 1962 S. C. 36. 

5. Venkataramana v. Union of India, 1955 S. C R. 1 ISO : A. I. R. 1954 s. C. 375. 

6. Mod Ram v. North Eastern Frontier Railway. AIR. mm r rivs « K 

Nagarajan v. Stale of Mysore, A. I- R. 1964 S. 1942 . C 600 * B - N * 



381 


3J1 SERVICES UNDER THE UNION AND THE STATES 

of the -State Services hold office ^eofully adop?ed°io this Article. A civil 
this rule of English Law has no Cro ^ n for arrears of salary. (See 
servant in India could atways sue t J- qua Vffied by the words “except" 
State of Bihar v. Ah fl 1 Thus Art. 310 itself places 

*s “expressly provided by tbc f ons “- S e Q r the pleasure. The doctrine of 
restrictions and limitations on the e The services of permanent 

Measure under Ait. 310 in accordance with rules 

government servants cannot be termi f thc constitution and the 

made under Art. 309 if £ e of pleasure b involved by the Govern. 

fundamental rights. , T , he a , b ° v ;““ Government servant attains the age of 
ment in the public IMnttt ' “ st[vice . This is constitnlionally per- 
50 years or has completed 25 years or undcr F R. 56 (b) dots not 

missible as compulsory IBBJg puoishme „t. While the Government 
amount to removal or dismissal by " ay p utorily retire a Government servant, 
reserves its right under F.R. 56 (b) to c P of ,h; Government servant 

even against his wish, “ ■“Sm seivice by giving the Government 
under F. R. 56 (c) to v ^? al fV y ‘“'"estion of acceptance of the request for 
three months’ nonce. There i » „ hcn ,he Government servant ere, rises 

voluntary retirement by the Governor 

his tight under F. R. 56 fci. _ Tte Constitution lays down she 

Restrictions on • j ™ f the dKLI ine of pleasure : 

following limitations on the «e, GovtmM is controlled by provisions 

(1) Thc pleasure of the President o excluded from the operation 

of Atticle all. SO the Belt) covered by mMt ^ exercised in accordance 

of the doctrine of nf0V idcd by Article all 

with the procedural safeguards pt Judges," High Court Judges," 

f2) The tenure of the Sngme Co Commis!ioI15r a and the Chair- 

Auditor-General of Mia,’ the Cb fee Commission,* are nol dependent on the 
man and members of the Public S r ' tte case may be. These posts are 

pleasure of the President or the doerrine of pleasure, 

expressly excluded form the p tD thc fundamental Rights. 10 

13) The doctrine of pleasure seryanla— Restrictions on the doctrine or 

constitutional “f<go«£ ,£ Swing safeguards to civil servants against 

any 'arbitrarr ‘dismissal from 'B* P““ ’ to th e Union or the States shall be 

( 1 ) Ho person ^“'»8 a S t J subordinate to that by which he was 

dismissed or removed by authority • 

appointed. 1 ’ ^ ••dismissed", “removed” or “reduced in rank 

(2) Mo such person shall be 'formed of the charges against 

except after an inquiry in which be 

1 A I R 1954 S. C 245- 

5. Atticle 124. - i 

6. Artcle 218. 

7. Atticle 148 (2). 

8. Article 324. 

9 . Article 317. . , R J96 2S. C- 630 ; General Maaaj-j* 

II. Article 311 (1)- 



382 


CONSTITUTIONAL JAW OP INDIA 


[Chap, 


him and given a reasonable opportunity of herns beard in respect of those 
charges [and where it is proposed, after such inquiry, to impose on him any such 
penalty , until he has been given a reasonable opportunity of making representation 
against the action proposed to be taken against him.] t 

The Amendment has amended clause (2) of Art, 3 1 1 and took away the' 
right of a Government servant Vo make representation at the second stage of 
the inquiry against the penalty proposed to be imposed. For this purpose’ the 
amendment deletes the italicised words in clause (2) of Art. 311. 

■CI»U Post’— -The Article is applicable only to one class of public officers, 
j. e. those who hold ‘a civil post’ under the Union or the States. These 
safeguards are not available to defence personnel or even a civilian employee 
in defence service. They can be dismissed from service without assigning any 
tea ton. 1 The term ‘civil post' is not defined in the Constitution, but having 
regard to Articles 310 and 31 1 it appears to have been used in contra-distinction 
to ‘defence post'. The term *civil post’ means an appointment, or office or 
employment on the civil side of the administration. 3 

In State of U. P. v. A. N. Singh * the Supreme Court held that a person 
bolds a civil post if there exists a relationship of master and servant between 
the State and the person holding the post. This relationship is established if 
the State has right to select and appoint the holder of the post, right to control 
the manoer and method of his doing the work and the payment by it of his 
wages or remuneration. 

1. No removal by subordinate authority.— Article 311 (1) says that a 
civil servant cannot be dismissed or removed by any authority subordinate to 
the authority by which he was appointed. This does not mean that the 
removal or dismissal must be by the same authority who made the appointment 
or by his direct superior. It is enough if the removing authority is of the same 
or co-ordinate rank as the appointing authority* In Mahesh v. State of U.P.f 
the person appointed by the Divisional Personal Officer, E. I. R., was dismissed 
by the Superintendent, power, E.I.R. The Court held the dismissal valid as 
both the officers were of the same rank. 

In S. Ktishnamarthy v. General Manager, Southern Railway , e the appellant 
was denied promotion owing to the administrative error of the Railway 
Administration. He was entitled to the promotion post but was not considered 
for the promotion post although others -similarly situated like him were 
promoted to the high post. This injustice was discovered by the Railway 
Administration and was set right the error bnt by that time others had been 
absorbed in the promotion post and the appellant was not. It was held that in 
the circumstances he was entitled to be promoted to the higher post. However, 
the court did not accept his contention to promote him retrospective as those 
who were promoted earlier might be adversely affected if the court directed the 


1. V.K. Nambuin v. Union of India, AIR 1961 Ker. 155. 

2. Sher Siogh v. Stale of M. P., AIR 1955 Nag 175. 

3. aa«oflh g P v. A. N^Singh,AIR 1965 SC 360 ; Stale of Assam v. KanaW Cbaodra, 


Union of India, t 

Vlabesh Prasad v. State of U. P., A I.R. 1955 s C 70 _ 

Asst. EE.. Coniral Railway. A.LR. 1979 S C.1972. “ Kumar v - Divisional 



3lJ SE&YlCEd UNDER THE UNION AND HIE STATES 383 

the appellants appointment to the promotion post with effect from an earlier 
date. The Court would not put the clock back for all purposes and treat him as 
optionally appointed retrospectively. It could only direct the Railway Admi- 
nistration to promote him to the post from the date on which he came to the 
High Court. But his notion of service would be considered retrospectively. 

Reasonable opportunity to defend.— Article 311 (2) lays down that a civil 
servant cannot be dismissed, or removed or reduced in rank unless he has been 
given a reasonable opportunity to show cause against the action proposed to 
be taken against him. 1 2 Originally, the opportunity to defend was given to a 
civil servant at two stages : (1) at the enquiry stage and this is in accord with 
the rule of natural justice that no man should be condemned without hearing ; 
and (2) at the punishment stage, when as a result of enquiry the charges have 
been proved and any one of the three punishments i. e. dismissal, removal or 
reduction in rank were proposed to be taken against him. 

The Constitution (42nd Amendment} Act, 1976, has abolished the 
right of the Government servants to make representation at the second stage 
of the inquiry. This second opportunity was given to the Government servants 
under the rulin t s of the Courts, which was given a constitutional sanction by 
the Constitution (,15th Amendment) Act, 1964. The newly added proviso to 
Art. 311 (2) by the (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976, makes it clear that if after 
inquiry it is proposed to impose upon a person any of the three punishments, 
i. e. dismissal, removal or reduction in rank, they may be imposed on (he basis 
of the evidence given during such inquiry and he shall not be entitled to make 
any representation- This means that the above-mentioned punishments will be 
imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced during the time of inquiry of 
charges against the Government servant. If as a result of such inquiry the 
charges are proved the same evidence shall be the basis of imposing the three 
penalties of the Government servant. This amendment is to be welcomed as 
the second inquiry was redundant. 

The protection of Article 311 (2) is available only where dismissal, removal 
or reduction in rank is proposed to be inflicted by way of punishment. The 
protection of Article 31 1 (2) is act available — 

(1) where a person is dismissed or reduced in rank on the ground of 
misconduct which has Jed to conviction on criminal charges ; 

(2) where it is impracticable to give the civil servant an opportunity to 
defend himself but the authority taking action against him shall record the 
reasons for such action ; 

(3) where in the interest of the security of State, it is not expedient to 
give such an opportunity to the civil servant.* 

In Shyam Lai v. State of U.P., 3 the question involved was whether com- 
pulsory retirement amounted to removal or dismissal within the meaning of 
Article 311 of the Constitution. In this case a civil servant was compulsorily 
. retired under Article 265 (a) of the Civil Service Regulations He challenged 
the order on the ground that h- was removed without giving him the reason- 
able opportunity to show cause against the action proposed to be taken in 
regard to him. The Supreme Court held that a compulsory retirement does 

1. Sukhrana Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1962 SC 1711. 

2. Article 311, Proviso. 

3. Shyam Lai v. State of U. P., AIR 1934 SC 369. 


J 



384 coNsmotioNAi. Law Of India [Chap. 

not amount to dismissal or removal as it carries no element of charge or 
imputation and, therefore, does not attract the provisions of Article 311. 

In Union of India v. /. N. Sinha ,* the validity of an order issued under the 
Service Rules by the Central Government retiring the respondent compulsorily 
from Government service was challenged on the ground that it violated the 
principles of natural justice. The Supreme Court held that rules of natural 
justice are not embodied rules nor can they be elevated to the position of 
fundamental rights These rules can only operate in areas not covered by any 
law validly made. 

But where sufficient opportunity given to the appellant to explain, the 
conduct is not availed of the requirement of natural justice cannot be said to 
be violated.* 

If the termination of service is in accordance with the terms of service or 
service rules it does not amount to dismissal or removal. In Gopal Krishna v. 
Union of India, 1 2 3 a railway employee was dismissed afier giving one month’s 
notice according to the terms of his agreement of service. The Court held 
that Article 311 (2) does not apply and, therefore, the dismissal was held 
valid. 

Termination of service when amounts to punishment.— As said earlier the 
protection of Article 311 is available only ‘when the dismissal, removal or 
reduction is by way of punishment’. The main question, therefore, is to 
determine as to when an order for termination of service or reduction in rank 
amounts to punishment. The Supreme Court has laid down two tests to deter- 
mine whether the termination or reduction is by way of punishment— 

(1) whether the servant had a right to hold the post or the rank ; 

(2) whether he has been visited with evil consequences. 

If a Government servants had a right to hold the post or rank either 
under the terms of any contract of service, or under any rule, governing the 
service, then the termination of his service or reduction in rank amount to a 
punishment and he be entitled to the protection of Article 311. 

In Purshottam Lai Dhingra v. Union of India,* the appellant was appoint- 
ed to officiate on a higher post. After two years’ service the appellant was 
reversed to his original post on the ground of unsatufatory work. It was 
said that the order of his reversion would not stand in the way of his being 
considered again for a promotion if in the future his work and conduct justi- 
fied. The Supreme Court held that the appellant bad no right to the post as 
he was merely officiating in the post and the implied term of such appointment 
was that it was terminable at any time on resonable notice by the Govern- 
ment. The appellant was not reduced in rank by way of punishment and 
therefore, he cannot claim the protection of Article 31 1 (2). In a case where a’ 
Government servant has no right to hold the post or the rank his termination 
from service or reversion does not amount to punishment, since it does nof 
forfeit any right of the servant to hold the post or the rank as he never bad the 
right. An order of removal or reduction in rank is of evil consequence when 

1. Union of India v. J N- Smha, AIR 197l SC 40. 

2. Shahoodul Haque v. Registrar, Co-op. Societies, Bibar, AIR 1974 SC 1894. 

’ Gopal Krishna v. Union of India, AIR 1954 SC 632. 

^Orshoiiam Lai Dhingra v Union of India, AIR 195g SC 36. 



3U SERVICES UNDER TUB UNION AND Ills STATES 385 

it “entails or provides for the forfeiture of his pay or allowance, or the stop- 
page or postponement of his future chances of promotion.” In the instant 
case, the order of reversion did not in any way affect the appellant’s future 
promotion or seniority in the substantive post. 

, ‘Reduction in rank’ within the meaning of Article 311 (3) means reduc- 
tion from a higher to a lower rank or post and not merely loosing place jo rank 
or cadre. In State of Punjab v. Kishan Das, 1 the respondent was a police 
constable in the Punjab Police Service. In I960 he was served with a charge- 
sheet attributing to him arrogance and indiscipline. A departmental enquiry 
was held under the Punjab Police Rules. The charges against him were proved 
and an order was issued forfeiting his entire service. This meant bringing down 
his salary to Rs. 45 p.m. which would be a salary payable to a constable at the 
starting point of his service. The Supreme Court held that the order did not 
amount to reduction in rank. For punishment of forfeiture of approved service 
resulting in loss of higher salary or reducing the chances of promotion to higher 
post ‘remedy lies’, under relevant service rules and not under Art. 311 (2). 
Under the Punjab Police Service Rules, the two punishments of reduction and 
.forfeiture are two distinct and separate punishments. 

In Debesh Chandra v. Union of India * the appellant who was the Chief 
Secretary of Assam, was appointed a Secretary in the Central Government, on 
a tenure post which was to expire in July, 1969. In September, 1966, he was 
asked to choose between reversion to the service of his parent State or compul- 
sory retirement. He contended that the order was a stigma and amounted to 
reduction in rank which therefore could not be passed without following the 
procedure laid down in Article 311 (2). The Court said that the cadre for the 
I. A. S. were to be found in the States only and not in the Central Government. 
Few of them, however, were intended to serve at the Centre and wbrn they did 
so, they enjoyed better emoluments and status. Such an appointment meant 
promotion to a higher post. In the circumstances, the Court held that the 
order of reversion to the original post amounted to the appellant’s reduction 
from a higher to a lesser rank, and not a reduction in the same rime-scate post 
or deprivation of places in the same time-scale post, thereby adversely affecting 
his seniority therein or chances of promotion. 

In Mali Pan v. N. E. Frontier Railway, 8 it was held that the termination 
of service of a permanent employee cannot be made (except to the rules of 
superannuation and compulsory retirement), without observing the procedu- 
ral safeguards provided in Article 311. Thus a permanent employee cannct be 
dismissed even if under the rules termination was authorised for any other 
reason, and, therefore, the rules were held violative of Article 311 (2). 

In State of Mysore v. A/. K. Godgoli the respondent who was a Govern- 
ment servant holding a substantive post of a clerk. He was promoted as Awal 
Karkun in officiating capacity. But subsequently he was reverted to his subs- 
tantive post on ground of unsatisfactory work. He challenged the validity of 
the order on the ground that he was reduced in rank without giving a reason- 
able opportunity in Art. 311 (2) of the Constitution. The Court, however, held 

J, Stale of Punjab v. Kishan Das, AIR 1971 SC 766, 

2. AIR 1970 SC 77. 

3. AIR 1964 SC 600. 

4. AIR 1977 SC l«I7. 

Const. 49 



386 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Chap. 


that the reversion in this case not amount to reduction in rank by way of 
punishment and hence Art. 311(2) was not attracted. The Court said that a 
person officiating in a post has no right to hold it for all times. Such a person 
is given a higher officiating post to test his suitability to be made permanent 
later and holds it on implied terra that he would have to be reverted if he was 
found unsuitable. The reversion in such a case on the ground or unsuitability 
is an action in accordance with the terms on which officiating post was being 
held and is not a reduction in rank by way of punishment. 

But the suspension of a Government servant from service is neither dis- 
missal or removal nor reduction in rank, therefore, if a Government servant, is 
suspended he cannot claim the constitutional guarantee of reasonable opportu- 
nity. 1 > 

Article 311 applies to both temporary and permanent servants.— The consti- 
tutional guarantee of resonable opportunity is available to both permanent 
and temporary servants. In Purshottam Lai Dhingra v. Union of India,' 1 the 
Supreme Court held that “Article 310. in terms, makes no distinction between 
permanent and temporary members of the service or between persons holding 
temporary or permanent post in the matter of their tenure being dependent 
upon the pleasure of President or tbe Governor, so does. Article 31 1, in our 
view, make no distinction between the two classes, both of which are, there- 
fore, within its protection, and the decisions holding the contrary view cannot 
be supported as correct." 

However, if a Government servant is holding a temporary post, termina- 
tion after reasonable notice cannot entitle him to the protection of the 
safeguards provided in Artticle 311 (2) because he has no right to the post held 
by him. 

In Champ'akhl v. Union of India* the service of an officiating Assistant 
Director was terminated after giving him one month’s notice without giving 
him any opportunity to show cause why his services should not be terminated 
because he was a temporary employee and as his work and conduct were 
found unsatisfactory. A memorandum was given to him in which he was 
asked to explain certain matters and he was asked to state why disciplinary 
action should not be taken against him. Although some enquiry was held 
against him but it was subsequently dropped because evidence against him was 
not considered conclusive. The appellant challenged the termination of his 
service on the ground that the memorandum really amounted to a charge-sheet 
against him and hence the provisions of Article 311 ought to have been comp- 
lied with. 

The Court relying in the case of Shyam Lai v. Stole of U. P., A held that 
Article 31 1 (2) had no application to the facts of the present case. The mere 
fact that some preliminary enquiry was held against a temporary servant and 
following that enquiry the services were dispensed with in accordance with the 
contract of service or under the specific service rule would not mean that the 
termination of service amounted to infliction of punishment of dismissal or 
removal within the meaning of Article 3JJ (2). 

In State of Punjab v, Sukh Raj Bahadur, 5 the Supreme Court summarized 


V atb* v cf MR i%a sc vm 

of Bihar v IVl. 1 Un i on , ° f ^ v - <*• K - More, AIR 1962 SC 360 ; See also State 
3. SC 'OH' 

c ‘ 5*1 ? 69 ! Stale of Orissa v. Rata Nataysa Das. AIR 1961 SC 1T1 

5. State of Punjab v. Sukh Raj Bahadur, AIR 1968 SC 1089. * '* 



3i] 


SERVICES UNDE 1 ? THE UNION AND THE STATES 


387 


the principles relating to the applicability of Article 311 to the temporary 
servants and probationers. The Court referred the whole previous case-law on 
the subject and laid down the following propositions : 

(1) The services of a temporary servant or of a probationer can be termi- 
nated under the rules of his employment, and such termination without any- 
thing more will not attract t be operation of Article 311. 

(2) The circumstances preceding or attendant on the order of service have 
to be examined in each case, the motive behind it being immaterial. 

(3) If the order visits the public servant with any evil consequences or 
casts an as persion against his character or integrity, it must be considered 
to be one by way of punishment, no matter whether he was a mere probationer 
or a temporary servant. 1 

(4) Any order of termination of service in unexceptionable form preceded 
by an enquiry launched by the superior authorities only to ascertain whether 
the public servant should be retained in service does not attract Article 3 1 I. 

(5) If there is a full scale departmental enquiry envisaged by Article 31 1, 
that is, an enquiry officer is appointed, a charge-sheet sumbitted, explanation 
called for and considered, any order of termination of service made thereafter 
will attract Article 311. 

In the instant case, the petitioner was a permanent official in the office 
of Chief Commissioner, Delhi. He was taken into the service of the Punjab 
Government and posted to the higher post, and he served bis probation of IS 
months. He was first served with a charge-sheet, to which he sent his explana- 
tion in which he applied for an oral enquiry. He was then served with an 
order passed by the Punjab Government reverting him to his original appoint- 
ment in tbe Delhi Administration. He challenged the order of reversion on 
the ground that the order terminated his service without giving him an oppor- 
tunity to show cause against it. The Court held that tbe order of termination 
could not be challenged as being in contravention of Article 31 1. The enquiry 
did not proceed beyond the stage of serving a charge-sheet, followed by an 
explanation or the petitioner. The enquiry was not proceeded with, there was 
no settings of any enquiry officer, no evidence recorded and no conclusions 
arrived on the enquiry. 

Reasonable opportunity.— According to Art. 311 (2) a civil servant cannot 
be dismissed or reduced in rank until he has been given reasonable opportunity 
of showing cause against the action porposed to be taken in regard to him. 
What does the expression ‘reasonable opportunity’ mean 1 In Khem Cfiand v. 
Union of India, 2 the Supereme Court held that the "reasonable opportunity” 
envisaged by Article 311 includes: — 

(1) an opportunity to deny his guilt and establishes his innocence which 
can be only done if he is told what the charges against him arc and the allega- 
tions on which such charges are based ; 

(2) an opportunity to defend himself by cross-examining the witnesses 
produced against him and by exmining himself or any other witnesses k, 
support of his defence ; and also 


t. AIR I960 SC 689. 
2. AIR 1958 SC 300. 



388 


CON ST ITUTIONAt LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap 


(3) an opportunity to make his representation as to why the proposed 
punishment should not be inflicted on him, which he can only do so if the 
competent authority, after the enquiry is over and after applying bis mind to 
the gravity of the charges, tentatively proposes to indict one of the three major 
punishments and communicates the same to the Government servant. 

In the instant case, the appellant who was in Government service had 
been served with a charge-sheet and an enquiry was held on the basis of the 
report of the enquiry officer, he was served with an order of dismissal the next 
day. The appellant challenged the validity ot the order of dismissal on the 
ground that he had not been supplied with a copy of the Enquiry Officer’s 
Report, and no opportunity was given to him agamst the action proposed to he 
taken in regard to him as required by Article 3t 1. The Court held that even 
though an enquiry had been held on the basis of which the Enquiry Officer 
bad reported that the charges were proved, and recommended the punishment 
of dismissal the authority competent to pass an order of punishment was 
bound to give a further opportunity to the Government servant to show cause 
why the particular punishment of dismissal should not be inflicted on him. 
It was at this stage where the punishing authority had accepted the report 
of the Enquiry Officer and proposed to inflict a particular punishment that 
the further opportunity became due. SiDce no further opportunity had been 
given ro the appellant, the order of dismissal was unconstitutional being in 
violation of the requirements of Article 311 (2). 

In Divisional Superintendent, Eastern Railway v. Danapur, 1 the Court held 
that any reduction of scale ef a confirmed Government servant without giving 
him any opportunity to be heard was illegal. The Court said that when emp- 
loyee is confirmed he has right to the post and the scale of pay fixed, which can- 
not be varied without following the procedure laid down in Article 3U (2). 

In State of Punjab v. Bhagat Ram, 2 the respondent was a Sub-Divisional 
Officer. The State ordered a departmental enquiry against him. As a result 
of the departmental inquiry the respondent was dismissed from his service. 
He challenged the order of dismissal on the ground that he was not given 
reasonable opportunity as contemplated by Art. ?H of the Constitution as he 
was not supplied with the copies of the statements recorded by the police in 
the course of investigation of the witnesses proposed to be examined at the 
departmental inquiry in spite of his request. The State contended that the 
respondent was given the opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses It was 
argued that the synopsis was adequate to acquaint the respondent with the gist 
of evidence The Supreme Court held that the respondent was not given 
reasonable opportunity to be heard and therefore his dismissal was illegal 
The Court said, "It is unjust and unfair to deny the Government servant 
copies of statements of witnesses examined during investigation and produced 
at the inquiry in support of the charges levelled against the Government 
servant. A synopsis does not satisfy the requirements of giving the Govern- 
ment servant reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action 
proposed to be taken. Though the Government servant is given an opportu- 
nity to cross-examine the witnesses unless the statements are given to him he 
will not be able to have an effective and useful cross-examination. The object 
of supplying statements is that the Government servant will be able to refer 
to the ptevious statement of the witness proposed to be examined against the 
Government servant. 6 c 


1. MR 1974 SC 1889. 

?- AIR 1974 SC 2335, 



31) SERVICES UNOEK tllE UNION AND THE STATES 

1 1 attain. 1 the Supreme Court held “the 
In U. P. Government v. S r ip , tc givetl case the show, 

broad lost of •reasonable opport ty conlained or was accompanied by 

cause notice issued to the delinquent “ ' enable him to cleat himself of the 
so much information as was n J - n )he aUern a t ive to show that the 
guilt, if possible, even at hat stag . disproportionate to the nature of the 

penalty imposed was much EfX, ca ; c , impugned older of removal 
charge established against him. In tn^ [( ot cnqu i,y proceedings and corn- 
proceeded on the aOTpUnce o( lbe repoIt , Ending and "comments” 

meats of the Enquiry Oltar. N . PJ (bs b , sb;r authorities against the order 
of the same in order to hie an app hrfd lh>( lbe delinquent servant wat not 

of removal was given. It wa s . the agaimt lhc action proposed to be 

given B reasonable opportunity to f>te copiK of lbc tnatetial documents 

taken against him, and the non mppW ^ ^ p[op;r representation. The order 
had serious picji adtee ti 0 'itutional and -illegal . 

oftemova was et imendmcnl) Act, 1963. substituted a new 

The Constitution ( ls ' h „bi c h accepts the interpretation of the 
provision in place or e,.„„able opportunity”. Bat it has limited Ihe 

Supreme Couitof l „ b „ e , l which wilt now be available onlyon Jim bull i of 


supreme” Court of ta avalhble only on the basis of 

;Kid°e t n^p°toduX.r , Xme h of enquiry.. No fresh evidence be enlet- 

tained at this stage. empowers Parliament to create new AU 

All-India Sentces.— Article a Slatcs parliament can create 
India Setvice common to the Union ^ supported by not tess than two-thirds 
service if the Rajya Sabha by a ■»“»' “» £ ,bat it is necessary and espedient 

of the membeti pteseat and vou g^rvi^e 

in the national interest to ere ^ 19W> ba , amended Art. 312 nr 

The Constitution C 42od .1,1 creation of an All-India Judicial 

the Constitution which provides fo clause (3) says that such All-India 

Service by it parliamentary law. Jhe new elau^ £ a K Juise „ 

indiei-il Service shall not include any P m _ bes it clear that a law providing 
defined in Article 236. Th« new c au« ^ shall not be deemed to be an 

c :. s n ensure greater inter throuch these officets. This also 

Se SSies «“ lbe 'central Go«™SSdsl a ~Stol ever States i. matters^ 

enables the Central Govetnment to esetci $ sbou , d be ]tr , 

eMCUdon or Union Laws It i is hopedtl a .l n a ^ , be Government Jr* 

tssej-iasissa, 

the Judiciary. 



390 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA [Chap 

the Constitution, as an All-India Service, or as service or post under the Union 
or a State shall continue in force so fat as consistent with the provisions of this 
Constitution. 

The Constitution (28tli Amendment) Act, 1972, has abolished the privileges 
relating to salary, leave, pension, etc. of I.C.S. Officers which had been protec- 
ted by Art. 314 of the Constitution. 

42nd Amendment Act, 1976 and Services, — The 42nd Amendment provides 
for the establishment of Service Tribunals for the determination of disputes 
relating to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public 
services under Central, State or any local or other authority, or a Corporation 
owned or controlled by Government. The new Article 323A introduced by the 
Amendment empowers Parliament by law to establish service tribunals. Such 
a law may exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except that of the Supreme 
Court under Article 136 with respect to disputes and complaints falling under 
Art. 323A. 

No law has so far been passed by Parliament and therefore the existing 
jurisdiction of High Courts and the Supreme Court will continue. 

PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 

The Constitution provides for the establishment of a Public Service Com- 
mission for the Union and for each State.* Two or more States may agree to 
have Common Public Service Commission. 1 The Union Public Service Com- 
mission, if requested by the Governor of a State, may with the approval of the 
President, agree to act for a State. 

Appointment of Members of Public Service Commission.— The Chairman 
and members of the Union Public Service Commission or a Joint Commission 
are appointed by the President and in the case of a State Commission by the 
Governor. 3 But one-half of the members of every.Public Service Conmmsion 
must be persons who at the dates of their appointments have held office for 
at least ten years under the Government of India or under the Government of 
a State. > 

A rc ember or Public Service Commission shall hold office for a period 
of 6 >eass. Unless he attains the age of 65 in case of Union Commission or 60 
years in case of State Commission, whichever is earlier. If he attains the age 
of retirement be has to retire even before the expiry of normal terms of 6 
years.* A member may himself resign from his office. 5 He may also be 
removed from his office by order of the President on the ground of misbeha- 
viour, if on reference made by the President the Supreme Court, after enquiry 
report to the President that he should be removed. 6 If the Chairman or any 
other member of a Public Service Commission is or becomes in any way con- 
cerned or interested in any contract agreement made by or on behalf of the 
Government of India or State Government or participates in any way in the 
profit or emolument resulting from such contract, or agreement he shall be 
deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour. 7 They may also be removed by the 

. 1. Article 315 (I). 

2. Article 3 15 (2). 

3. Article 316(1). 

4. Article 316 (2). 

5. Article 316(2) (a). 

6. Article 316 (2) (a). 317(a). 

7. Article J17 (1). 



31| SMVtCflUW** HIE UNION »M> HH «!»«» 

President without any oter'pa'd ' emptoySdJriKc term 

President, unfit 1 2 3 to continue ,n oir.ee by 

reason of infirmity oj mind or body. Service Commission are 

The members of the Union ‘“of their term of office, 
debarred from re-appointment af,cr ‘?l me nt under the Central or State 
^etnmetrlh^ovuS i° n h eeessa, P , in otdet to ensute impatt.ah.y 

Functions of rublie Settle Commissin n .- lt mnSian fol 

Union Public Service Coramiss on to assist tn Unjon of Statc Commissions 
for services requiring special qualifications. 

must be consulted- methods of recruitment to civil posts ; 

a “ d ^££2^*** * 5 6 7 " V ''“ UDJ " "" C '° ,ral 

or State Government ; fM lht cosu iacutred ia defending 

legal {£a , a®r*?a?S? in rcsp "' of “ ,s *“ or p “ rpo "'" s 

b ' dQ ;; ) on lb .n'eUim°f”°con,peata,i;a in tetpee, of injuries suttaiu.d by n 

- - --m 


overnmeor. , , , . 

_ . . he the duty of the Commission to advise. 

In all above mal'cts » shaltoe make regulations specifying the 

However, the President and the : Gove n Jrt i cu | a r circumstances the Com- 

of the Public Service Com- 
mission may not be consulted. stitul i on has no provision to make it 

missions are only advisory ^and th Co lhe 3 dvice of the Commission in 

obligatory upon the Government to i ac nt ed nol t* consulted as 

?Se SSSfiLSaS ?*' ££** — • Sch ' du1 ' C ““ s “ d 

c^hetinted Tribes. 4 . . , . 1 ,. tlninn and State Public 


Scheduled Tribes.* ussicned to the Union and State Public 

Service Comcnission n byau S Service ^ommissioi'.'^an^tlw^alariest 

SS^A’SS^' irs2i4 “ ,, ‘ c °“°' ida “ d Fundof lBd,lor 

State, as the case may be. oua j ^ t on the work done by 

The Commissions shall s “' 5 r m, ‘ a , be ca « may be. The reports are to be 
them to the President or Govern, Legislatures, respectively together with 

Said before lb. rfs the cases ihete Ihe advice of the Commits, on was 

LTa?e°ept”d°a”d Sb=ieasoas tesucb.o-acuepUt.ee. 

1. Article 319. 

2. Article 3“ l J >; , r. 1»2 S. C. lUO. 

3 . D ’Silva v. Union of India. A. 

4. Article 320 (4). 

5 . Article 321. 

6. Article 322. 

7 . Article 323 0) and 12). 



32 


Tribunals 

(Arts. 323- A a nd 323 B) 

The new Chapter has been added to the Constitution by the Constitution 
(42nd Amendment) Act, 1976. It consists of two articles— Articles 323-A and 
323-B. Article 323-A provides for the establishment of Administrative 
Tribunals by a Parliamentary law for determining disputes relating to the 
recruitment and conditions of service of Government servants under the Union 
Government and the State Governments. Article 323-B provides for the 
creation of tribunals for the determination of disputes, complaints and offences 
relating to tax matters, export and imports, labour and industrial disputes, 
service matters, supply of essential commodities, elections to the Parliament and 
the State Legislatures. 

Tribunals for service matter— Art. 323-A— Article 323-A provides for the 
establishment of Administrative Tribunals by a Parliamentary law for the 
adjudication oi trial of disputes and complaints relating to the reciuitment and 
conditions of service of Government servants under the Central Government 
and the State Governments including the employees of aoy local or other 
authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government 
of India or of a corporation owned or controlled by the Government, Such a 
law may provide for the establishment of a tribunal for tbe Union and separate 
tribunals for each State or for two or more States. Such a law will also 
make provisions for : — 

(1) tbe jurisdiction, powers, (including tbe power to punish for 
contempt' and authority to be exercised by the above tribunals ; 

(2) the procedure to be followed by tbe above tribunals ; 

(3) the exclusion of the jurisdiction of all courts* except tbe jurisdiction 

of the Supreme Court under Article 136 ; 

(4) the transfer of all cases to the tribunals which were pending before 
any court or authority before the establishment of such tribunals ; 

(5) repeal or amend any order made by the President under clause (3) 
of Article 371-D ; 

(6) supplementary or incidental or consequential provisions for the 
effective functioning of such tribunals. 

The provisions of Article 323-A shall have effect notwithstanding any- 
thing in any other provision of this Constitution or in any other law for the 
time being in force. 

Tribunals for other matters -Art. 323-B - Article 323-U empowers parlia- 
ment and the State Legislatures to establish tribunals for the adjudication of 
any disputes, complaints or offences with respect to all or any of the matters 
specified in clause (2) of this Article. The matters referred to in clause (2) are 
the following, namely— 

(a) levy, assessment, collection and enforcement of any tax ; 

(b) foreign exchange and import and export ; 

(c) industrial and labour disputes ; 



32) 


TRIBUNALS 


393 


(d) land reform laws enacted under Article 31-A of theConstitution ; 

(e) ceiling on urban properly ; 

ff) etection disputes of members of Parliament or the State Legislatures, 
but excluding the matters referred-to in Articles 329 and 329-A. These articles 
have taken away the jurisdiction of the. Courts to decide election disputes of 
the Prime Minister and Speaker of the Lok Sabha ; 

(g) production, procurement, supply and distribution of foodstuffs and 
essential goods and control of prices of such goods ; 

(h) offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified in 
sub-clauses (a) to (g) and fees in respect of any of those matters ; 

(i) matters incidental to any of the matters specified in the above sub- 
clauses. Such a law will define the jurisdiction and powers of such tribunals 
and will lay down procedure to be followed by the said tribunals. 

Exclusion of jurisdiction of Courts. — Articles 323-A and 323-B provide 
for the exclusion of the matters mentioned in these articles from the jurisdic- 
tion of “all courts” except the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 
136 of the Constitution. These articles thus deprive the Supreme Court and 
High Courts of their writ jurisdiction under Articles 32 and 226 in matters 
specified therein. The object of this new provision is to remove hurdles in the 
implementation of laws providing for socio-economic reforms. According to 
the Swaran Singh Committee on constitutional amendment, the amendment is 
intended to remove the defects of the existing judicial process which had led to 
dilatory proceeding and delays causing a great deal of inconvenience and 
expenditure of the State as well as affected parties. 

Appeal in Supreme Court by Special Leave— Art. 136.— Though the writ 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Art. 32 has now taken away, yet 
the Court’s jurisdiction in the above matters are not totally shut out. An 
aggrieved party can still go to the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the 
Constitution. The Supreme Court has already laid down the guidelines for the 
grant of special leave to appeal from the decisions of the tribunals. 


Const. 50 



33 

Elections 
(Arts. 324 to 329-B) 

Election Commission.— Article 324 provides for the appointment of an 
Election Commission to superintend, direct and control elections. The Election 
Commission is an independent autonomous body, and the Constitution ensures, 
as in the case of the Supreme Court and the High Courts, that it may be able 
to function freely without any Executive interference. 

The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election Commissioner 
and such other Election Commissioners as the President may from time to 
time fix. The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners 
are appointed by the President subject to the provisions of any law made by 
Parliament for that purpose. 1 The President may also appoint after consulta- 
tion with Election Commission such Regional Commissioners as he may consi- 
der necessary to assist the Election Commission in its functions.* The 
conditions of service and tenure of office of the Election Commissioners and 
the Regional Commissioners shall be such as the President may by rule 
determine. The Chief Election Commissioner can be removed from his office 
in the same manner and on the same grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court, 
The conditions of service of the Chief Commissioner cannot be varied to his 
disadvantage after his appointment. The Election Commissioners and 
Regional Commissioners can only be removed on the recommendation of the 
Chief Election Commissioner. The Constitution thus secures the tenure of 
office of the Chief Election Commissioner and otheT Commissioners. They can 
therefore perform their duties without fear, favour or pressure from the Execu- 
tive or party in power. 

Functions of Election Commission.— According to Article 324 (I) the Elec- 
tion Commission performs the following functions : 

(1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of 
the electoral roll for all elections to Parliament, State Legislatures 
and to the offices of President and Vice-President. 

(2) The conduct of elections. 

(3) Appointment of Election Tribunals for deciding doubts and disputes 
arising out of Election to Parliament or State Legislatures. 

(4) Advising the President and the Governors on the question of dis- 
qualification of any member of Parliament or a State Legislature 
as the case may be.* 

There shall be one general electoral roll for every territorial coastituen- 
wa? shall. he. <nrJifyMr. far. inrJ/irj/w. vj, ■uuj wJi. y * }},vb -gvut mfo 

only of religion, race, caste, sex or any of them. The elections to the Parlia- 
ment and State Legislatures are to be held on the basis of adult suffrage. 

]. Article 324 (2). 

2. Article 324 (4). 

3. Article 103. 

A. Article 325. 


331 


ELECTIONS 


395 


r i n , ritt7en of India and who is not less than 21 years of age, 

S3SESMSH, under «g-^«^s«SsS!S 

a ' isht “ be " 8ii,ercd as 

a voter. 1 . _ 

, « „„ a State Lccisla lures with regard to Election Law.— 

roiraoU’allimtnland SI.I.WCI ^ provisionJ „ ilh respecl 

Allicle 327 'ft”"'” ^“^tlljowilh election to Parliament and State 
all matters relating to or in con ■ “ h delimitation of constitnencies 

Legislature, the P«P>“ U “” " ''"{““S of the power conferred by Article 
and all other connected matters T» L'“^“ f Pt oples Acts. 1950 and 

327. Parliament has enacted the R prese" HecliooJ ^1952 . ,„d the De- 
1951 : the Presidential and Vic ® J28 confer , a s j mi lar power on State 

limitation Commisslon Act. l95A Ar^ !aws relating the above 

mauefs TefVrred to unde, ^ikle 327, in so far as provision in that behalf ,s no. 

made by Parliament. Section mattcra.-ArticIe 329 says that the 

Courts n ?‘ ,he delimitation of constituencies or the allot- 

validity or any law telatujt w sbal | not ^ called in question in any court, 
went of seats to such coostiturocie elections „ n only be called in question 
Clause (b) of Article 329 pro » authority and in such manner as may 

by an election-petition presented * ' |ate legislation. In exercise of the 

be laid down by law ' « ad . e ^ ^rtickf Parliament enacted the Representation 
power under clause (b) Act the decision of the Election Commission 

of Peoples Act. 1951. Under * offie „ t Nama kal » the appelhnt’s 
was final. In Ponnu S *ami _v. K was rejected by the Returning Officer, 
nomination paper for the State A Article 226 to quash the order of the 

He then moved the High Court of his name in the list of valid 

Returning Officcrandto ffirej. » |Med thc wnt-petition on the ground that 
nominations. The ; High L.oun ^ jurisdiction to interfere with the order 
under Article 329 (W the Cou J “ flt J weot in appeal to the Supreme Court, 
of the Returning Officer. Th PP^ .. c]ect ion" , n Article 329 connotes the 
The Supreme Court held that » to return the candidate to the legislature, 

entire procedures to begone B c ^ rt under Article 226 as we Accep- 

and bars the jurisdiction or the iig 5j |nc , ude d m the term “election . 

tance or rejection of nomination v v clect j on _ petlt , on before the High Court 
The matter can only be cnan.ogcu j 

after the election is over. Reoreseotation of the Peoples Act 

, But neither Article 329 (b) nor th J e P decis i on or order of the Election 
(before its amendment) which ^ powef of H igh Courts under Article 

Tribunal shall be final Suprem e Court under the Article, 

226,. and the power of rhe Supreme, C ths jorisdic.ion 

The Constitution ( 19 *A“';Sto?dkpotes. The Amendment vested this 
of Election Tribunals to decide eleeu ^ , be power „ the High Courts 

SToM^dte decrskn to election disputes. 

1. Article 326- it 

2 AIR 1962 SC air 1955 SC25J; W.ryam Siogbv. Am.r Natb, 

3 SSSfsClH- SC 520 ; S.»en™sia 8 h». Election Tnb„.|. 

a Durga Sbanker v. Raeborai. AH' 1 

AIR 1955 SC 425. 



395 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Chap 


1975, which took away IhefurLchction* oMhc'^' 0 " ^ 39lh Am!ndm =nt) Act, 
Courts to decide election dispute™ ttc 5? e ,M Pr ; mc „. CD S rt a ” d the High 
Prime M lnlsttr and , bt Speaker of the Uk slhh, J n’ • V lc '; P ' e!,<, “ t “ml Ihe 
jurisdiction to the Supreme Court to decSe .1 ,■ ?. n8IDaU )’- Arlidc 71 gave 

and the Vice-President of I. *£'" d I p " ,a of lbe RuBm!' 

Ihe Representation of Peoples Act 1951 ™' n “ meDt had amended Art. 71 and 
titution which provided thSt the 3«”n info the Cons- 

lanes shall be determined by a special i .f. tbc above mentioned digni- 


The 44th Amendment Act iQ 7 j> 
ou the omitted article is £* re„S^. SOSTSS. %&"££ 


& b « “* "'«% ° 8 «b= Constitu. 

the basic features of the Constitution i c J iallen *« J on ,hc ground that it affects 
elect.cn and hence it is uncon tSona ' NK* bcf ° rB tbc free and fair 

Allahabad Hi a ” ap P“' i« “bn Suprete CoS» ° fca “ as »' : 

The exolanafinn .. 


, *^he explanation declares that a -a 

mswmm 

as.- p "“ HfitWi S p H 


. a gazetted 

Curing the pendency of tin* * * 1 

ks 'ksmk p "' ia »™ 

which amends section 77 mJv* removaI of such disaualifu5»"° <1 ' J Ie ma >' 
consideration. It declares^ tt , P rc ‘ DOn> in a'i on expenses a mat !?' f . Section 6 
the discharge of hi, JS r i, h “i 1 by a GoveTnm " ° f ,,rel ' va ”> 

facilities shall not be deemed L d £ ty 10 connection with anv fw ' “ fvant in 
cd for the furtherance of the elect^ nd ’ tUre or Stance fncurreH B£mentS of 
Section 7 redefines the word viS D . P ros P«ts of the cand.dl. d 01 tcndcf ' 
Caims to have heeu duly ^ SJSS, » a: ' S? ‘CS * 

1- air 1975 SQ2299, y election. Section 8 



H.ECTI0N3 


397 


33) 


nmvides that no symbol allotted to a candidate shall be deemed to be a reli- 
S or a national symbol. It also says that the pub tattoo in the Official 
Gaiette of the resignation of a Government servant shall be conclusive proof 
„r .h. Get of resignation. ir the effective date of resignation is stated in the 
publication, it shall also be eonclnsive proof of the fact that the Government 
servant ceated to be in service with effect from the particular date Section 10 
,,imenective effect to amendment made by sections 5, 6, 7, and 8. It 
a'nnfies to'arwetection before and after the commencement of this Act or any 
cleelioVpetUion pending befoie any High Court or decided by any High Court 
£ ,o an Section-appeal pending in the Supreme Court. 

This Act virtually seals the controversy in the appeal. Again, on August 
,n inTs the Constitution (39th Amendment) Act was passed by Parliament. 
10, 1975, tnc L.OD! chances in the Constitution. It inserted two new Articles 
It T d r 3 o a Sifts In the Ninth Schedule three Acts (i) R. P. Act, 
ioS C f^R t p (Amendment) Act, 1975, (iii) Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 
1951, OjLjk Article 71 puts the election disputes relating to the President 
197 AlJpresidcnt beyond The judicial scrutiny. The New Art. 329-A makes 
and Vice-President y . Qns to p a rh ament in the case of Prime Minister 
special provisions a Article 2 29-A has six clauses out of which 

and Speaker oi roe with (be future election cases of the Prime Minister 

clauses (1), (2) ano tJj takes out the election disputes of these persons 

and the Speaker. *- a ' Courls aD d vests in a body to be created by a law 
from the jurisdiction of Hign , that ,he validity of such a law cannot 
S. ade u by d TnSSn in a^ egurt. Clause (3) provided that if a person after 
be called in Q ucs ’'°“.‘ . J as Prime Minister or chosen to the office of the 

his election is appm any election-petition pending against him under the 
Speaker of the take the jurisdiction of courts to 
t^tleciion disputes^f 'the Prhne Minister and the Speaker of the Lok Sabha. 

y • v >\ „ r „ v :,ud that • “No law made by Parliament before the com- 
Clause (4) provided tha^^t Act> ,975, relating to election-petitions and 

mencement of 39th Ameno or stall be deemed ever to have applied 

matters connected therrwitnsi»|j^;ppj d the Speaker. It provides that the 
» the elect,™ of '£,,5"™ uot be void or ever to have become void 

election of the arores p fa elcction could be declared to be void or has 
on any ground on een declared to be void under any such law. It 

before such commencement, : udgmeot of any court such election shall 
declares that “jjjj judgment shall be deemed always to have been 

continue to be valid aud uc 1 thlt „ oy appeal or cross-appeal betore 

void and of no effect, uau t j conformity with the provisions of 

,hc Supreme Couit shull be d. posed w of Art. 329-A shall „ kt r 

a * piiuiipiijfd the validity of the Constitution (39th Amend- 
meut)^,T975 a'u°d also the Election Laws Amendment Act, 1975 ou lfc 

following grounds^^^^^^^^^^a^^cacnHe^or ^framework of 

Art. 368 ; . 

from attending it. 

The Supreme Con,, b, u main, it, of 3-2 (Khanna. Mathew 



398 


coNsrmmoNAt law of jndia 


[Chap. 


chud. JJ.,) specifically struck down clause (4) of Art. 329-A as unconstitutional 
on the ground that it was beyond the amending power of Parliament as it 
effected the basic features of the Coastituitoa. However, they gave varied 
reasons for their separate judgments. Khanna, J., struck down clause (4J on 
the ground that it violates the principle of Free and Fair elections which is an 
essential postulate of democracy and which in its turn is a part of the basic 
structure. Democracy can indeed fuoction only upon the faith that elections 
are free and fair. Free and fair election requires that the candidates should 
not resort to unfair means or malpractices, disputes are bound to arise regarding 
the validity of elections. For resolviog such disputes there must be a forum. The 
vice of clause (4) is that it abolishes the forum without providing for another 
forum for deciding election disputes of the appellant. Mathew, J., said that 
our Constitution [Art. 329 (b)l visualizes that election disputes must be decided 
by a judicial process, namely, by ascertaining facts and applying the pre-existing 
law. Clause (4) validates the election by a legislative process. The amending 
body, though possessed of judicial power, bad no competence to exercise it 
unless it passed a constitutional law enabling it to do so. If the amending 
body really exercised judicial power, that power was exercised in violation of 
the principles or natural justice of audi alteram partem. There was nothing 
in the face of the amendment to show that amending body ascertained the facts 
of the case or applied any norms for determining the validity of the election. 
The amendment damages or destroys an essential feature of democracy as 
established by the Constitution, namely, decision of election dispute by court 
in the exercise of judicial power by ascertaining facts and applying the existing 
law. He criticised it as a legislation ad hom'tnem directed against the course of 
the bearing of the apeals oo merits as the appeal was to be disposed of in 
accordance with that clause and not by applying the law to the facts as ascer* 
tained by the Court. This was a direct interference with the decision of these 
appeals by Supreme Court on their merits by a legislative judgment. It was 
difficult to understand when the amending body expressly excluded the opera* 
tion of all laws relating to election-petition and matters connected therewith by 
clause (4), and what ideal norms of free and fair election it had in view in 
adjudging the validity of the appellant. According to Mr. Justice Chandracbud. 
clauses (4) and (5) of the amended Article were an outright negation of the 
right of equality conferred by Art. 14, which more than any other is a basic 
postulate of our Constitution. The provisions are arbitrary and are calculated to 
damage or destroy the Rule of law. He said, generality and equality are two 
indelible characteristics of justice admininstered according to law. Clause (4) 
makes the existing laws retrospectively inapplicable without providing a law. It 
creates a legal vacuum. This clause puts the election of Prime Minister and the 
Speaker beyond the reach of any law, past or present. It is the common man's 
sense of justice which sustains democracies and there is a fear that the 39th 
Amendment may outrage that sense of justice. Different rules may apply to 
different conditions and classes of men and even a single individual may, by his 
uniqueness, form a class by himself. But in the absence of a difference reason- 
ably related (o the object of the law, justice must be administered with an even- 
handed to all. He rejected the contention of the Attorney -General that the 
amending body is an amalgam of all powers, legislative, executive and judicial. 
He said, "whatever plesases the emperor has the force of law" is not an Article 
of democratic faith. In deciding this case the Court proceeded on the basis 
of the majority judgment in the Kesaranand Bharati't case namely, that Parlia- 
ment cannot alter the basic structure and framework of the Constitution while 
enactiog a constitutional amendment under Art. 368. 

The two other Judges, Chief Justice A. N. Ray and Justice Beg delivered 



33) 


ELECTIONS 


399 


dissenting judgment. The Chief Justice held that clause (4) is a "declaratory 
judgment” which has been passed by the Legislature in exercise of judicial 
power and “not a law". The Constituent power can exercise judicial power. 
All powers, legislative, executive and judicial flow from the constituent power, 
though he accepted that it offends the Rule of Law as it did not apply any law 
but yet he did not declare it unconstitutional. Justice Beg held that clause (4) 
does not bar the jurisdiction of the Court to hear and decide the appeal. 

AU the Judges upheld the validity of the amendments made in the Election 
Laws in 1974 and 1975. They held that in view of the amendments Mrs. Indira 
Gandhi had committed no corrupt practice. The Court did not accept the 
contention of the respondents that even ordinary laws would be subject to the 
test of basic structure of the Constitution. Such a limitation operates upon an 
amending law under Art. 368 and upon a law Under Art. 245. 



34 

Special Provisions Relating 
to Certain Classes 
(Arts. 330 to 342) 

Introduction. -Our Constitution i» consecrated by the ideals of equality 
and justice both in the social and political field. Accordingly, it abolishes any 
discrimination to any class of persons on the ground of religion, race or place 
of birth. It is in pursuance of this ideal that the Constitution has abolished 
communal representation or reservation of seats in the Legislatures or in any 
public office on the basis of retigioa. 

“It would have been a blunder on the part of the makers of our Constitu- 
tioiuf, on a logical application of the above principle ‘they had omitted to 
make any special provisions for the advancement of those who are socially and 
economically backward, for* the democratic march of nation would be impos- 
sible if those who ate handicapped are not aided at the start. The principle of 
democratic equality, indeed, can work only ;f the nation as a whole is brought 
on the same level, as far as that is practicable. Our Constitution, therefore, 
provides certain temporary measures to help the backward sections to come up 
to the same level with the rest of the ration, as well as certain permanent 
safeguards for the protection of the cultural linguistic and similar rights of 
any section of the community who might be said to constitute ‘minority’ from 
the numerical, not communal point of view, in order to prevent the democratic 
machine from being used as an engine of oppression by the numerical majority.”' 

(1) Article 46 of the Directive Principles tnjoins the State to take special 
care in promoting the educational and economic interests of the weaker 
sections of the people and in particular the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes and to protect them from social injustice. Any such provision made by 
the State canDOt be challenged on the ground of being discriminatory.* 

(2) Part III or the Constitution guaranteeing fundamental rights contains 
many provisions protecting minority rights. 

Article 14 guarantees to every person the right not to be denied equality 
before the law or the equal protection of laws Article IS prohibits discri- 
mination by State on grounds only of religion, race, caste, etc. with regard to 
access to public places. Nothing in this article shall prevent from making 
any special provisions for the advancement of socially and educationally back- 
ward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. 
Article 16 guarantees equality of opportunity In matters of public employment. 
It prohibits discrimination in respect of public employment on grounds only of 
religion, race, caste, etc. But the State can make reservations of appointments 
or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens not adequately represented 
in the service under the State. Atticle 17 abolishes untouch ability Article 19 
(6) jilkortets the Si ait So impose reasooabte rtslsictioas on ihe funds anratal 
rights guaranteed by Clauses (d), (e) and (fj of Article 19 for the protection of 
interests of any scheduled tribes. 

Articles 25 to 10 make provisions for protecting the religion and culture 
of minorities. Any section of the citizens of India having a distinct language. 

1. Uasu, D. D. i Introduction to the Constitution of India. 6th edition, p. 32?. 

2. T ba Constitution (Firs! Amendment) Act, I9J1 



34) SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING To CERTAIN CLASSES 401 

script, or culture shall have right to conserve the same. All minorities, whether 
based on religion or language, shall have the right to establish and admiaister 
educational institutions of their choice. In granting aid to educational institu- 
tions the State cannot discriminate on grounds that it is undtr the management 
of majority. 

Article 275 provides for grants-in-aid to the States for promoting the 
welfare of Scheduled Tribes. According to Article 325 there shall be one 
general electoral roll, and no person is ineligible for inclusion in it on grounds 
only of religion, race caste, etc. Article 164 provides for Special Minister for 
Tribal Welfare in Bibar, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa. 

Articles 330 to 342 make special provisions for safeguarding the interest 
of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Anglo Indians and Backward Classes. 
Articles 347, 350, 350-A, 350B make provisions for protecting the interests’ 
oflinguistic minorities. 

A. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. — The Constitution does not 
define as to who are the persons who belong to Scheduled Castes and Sche- 
duled Tribes. Articles 341 and 342 however empower the President to draw up 
a list oF these castes and tribes. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are 
those castes or tribes as the President may by public notification specify. If 
such notification is in respect of a State it can be done after consultation with 
the Governor of the State concerned. Any inclusion or exclusion from the 
Presidential notifi ration of any caste, race, or tribe can be done by Parliament 
by law. 

If any question arises whether or not a particular tribe is a tribe within 
the meaning of this Article, one has to look at the public notification issued by 
the President under Article 341 (l). 1 

The Constitution provides the following special provisions for tho protec- 
tion of the interests of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 

Reservation of seats in Lok Sabha and State Assemblies [Arts. 330 & 332}.— 
Article 330 provides for the reservation of seats in the Lok Sabha for Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The number of seats reserved in any State or 
Union Territory for such castes and tribes will be made on the population 
basis. The expression population for the purposes of this Article means the 
population as ascertained on the basis of 1971 census. The allocation of the 
seats in the Lok Sabha shall be frozen till the year 2000. This means that 
there will be no increase in the number of seats in the Lok Sabha till the 
year 2000. Similarly. Art. 332 provides for the reservation of seats for 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of every 
State, (except in the Tribal areas of Assam, Nagaland and Meghalaya). 

Qtifgnally under Art. 334 the reservation was made for ten years from 
the commencement of the Constitution. Since then, this duration was extended 
by ten years each time. The word ‘twenty’ was substituted by the Constitu- 
tion (8th Amendment) Act, 1959, for the words ‘ten years’. Again, the word 
‘thirty’ was substituted by the Constitution (23rd Amendment) Act, 1969 for 
the word ‘twenty’. Now, the word ‘forty’ has been substituted by the 45th 
Amendment Act, 1980 for the words ‘thirty* in Art. 334 of the Constitu'ion. 

Though seats arc reserved for them, they are elected by all the voters in 

1 Bhaiya Ut v. HaiiWshan Singh, AIR 1965 SC 1557 ; Basavitingappa v. Muaichinappa, 

AIR 1965 SC 1269. 

Const. 51 



402 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Chap. 


the Constituency. There is no separate electorate (or Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes. Article 325 expressly provides that there shall be one general 
electoral roll. This means that a member of Scheduled Castes and Tribes may 
contest any seats other than reserved, i. e., a general seat.* 

Article 333 however, makes it clear that the claims of the members of the 
Scheduled Castes and Tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently with 
the maintenance of administration, in the making of appointments to services 
and posts under the Union or State. For this purpose. Article 16 (4) permits 
reservation of posts for backward classes which may include the Scheduled 
Castes and Tribes. 

fo order that the safeguards given to Ibe minorities should be observed : 
Article 338 provides for the appointment by the President of a special officer 
for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. It shall be the duty of the 
Special Officer to investigate all matters, relating to the safeguards provided for 
these classes and to report to the President upon the working of those safe- 
guards at such intervals as the President may direct. The President is to cause 
all such reports to be laid down before each House of Parliament. 

The President may at any time and shall at the expiration of ten years 
from the commencement of the Constitution, appoint a Commission to report 
on the administration of the Scheduled Areas and the welfare of the Scheduled 
Tribes in the State.* The Central Government is also authorised to give 
directions to a State as to the drawing up and execution of schemes specified 
in the direction to be essential for the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the 
State. 8 


B. Anglo-Indians. 

According to Article 366 (2) an Anglo-Indian means a person whose 
father or any of whose other male progenitors in the male line is or was of 
European descent but who is domiciled within the territory of India or born 
within such territory whose parents habitually were resident in India and not 
established for temporary purposes only. 

The President may, if he is of opinion that the Anglo-Indian Community 
is not adequately represented in the Lok Sabha, nominate not more than two 
members of that Community to it * Similarly, the Governor of a Slate may, if 
he is of opinion that the Anglo-Indian Community is not adequately represent- 
ed in the Legislative Assembly of the State, nominate such number of members 
of the Community to the Assembly as he considers appropriate. 8 This conces- 
sion to the Anglo-Indian Community was only for 10 years from the commence- 
ment or the Constitution 8 But the duration was extended by ten years each 
time and now the 45th Amendment 1980 has extended it from thirty to ‘forty* 
years. Article 335 preserves certain special rights and privilegs enjoyed by the 
Anglo-Indian Community before the Constitution cam; into force It says that 
two years aBer commencement of the Constitution, appointments of members of 
the Anglo-Indian Community to the posts in the railway, customs, postal and 
telegraph services of the Union were to be made on the same basis as immedi- 


1- V.V.Giriv.D. S. Dora, AIR 1959 SC 1318. 

2. Article 339 (1). 

3. Article 333 (2). 

4. Articte 3)1. 

5. Article 333. 

6. Article 334 (b). 



34] 


SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATINO TO CERTAIN CLASSES 


403 


ately before August 15, 1947. 1 Thereafter, the number of posts reserved for the 
said Community were to be reduced by 10% after every two years, and at the 
end of ten years from the commencement of the Constitution all such reserva- 
tion came to an end. The members of the Anglo-Indian Community may 
also be appointed to posts other than or in addition to those reserved for the 
community under Article 336 (1) if such members arc found mala fide, for 
appointment on merit as compared with the members of other Community. 2 

For the first three years after the Constitution came into operation, the 
same grants would be made by the Central and the State Governments for the 
benefit of the Anglo-Indian Community in respect of education as were made 
ever before March 1, 1948. Such educational grams to be reduced after 
three years and come to an end after 10 years from the commencement of the 
Constitution, But no educational institutions run by the Anglo-Indian Com- 
munity were entitled to receive any grant unless at least 40% of the annual 
admission therein are made available to members of communities other than 
Anglo-Indian Community.* In State of Bombay v. Bombay Education Society* 
an order of State Government which prevented the Anglo-Indian school to 
admit students of other communities was held unconstitutional on ground that 
it prevented the Anglo-Indian Schools from performing this constitutional 
obligation of admitting at least 40% students of other communities. Under 
Article 337 the State could not impose any other obligation on the Anglo- 
Indian schools as a condition to redeye grants,* or so as to deprive them from 
such grant, except the condition of admitting at least 40% of non-Anglo-Indian 
students. 6 

C. Backward Classes. 

The Constitution docs not define as to who are the persons who belong to 
the Backward Classes. It is for the Central and the State Govemmncts to 
specify such classes of persons for the purposes of the Constitution. 

But under Article 330 (1) the President Is empowered to appoint a Com- 
mission consisting of such persons as he thinks fit to investigate the conditions 
of sodally and educationally backward classes withiD the territory of India and 
the difficulties under which they labour and to make recommendations as to 
the steps that should be taken by the Union or any State to remove such 
difficulties and to improve their condition and as to the grants that should he 
made by the Union or any State for that purpose and conditions subject to 
which such grants should be made. 

The Commission so appointed shall investigate the matters referred to it 
and present to the President a report setting out the facts as found by them and 
making such recommendations as it thinks proper. 7 The President is required 
to Jay down the report of the Commission together with a memorandum 
explaining the action taken thereon before each House of Parliament. 

After the receipt of the report of the Commission, the President may, by 

1. Article 335. 

2. Article 335 (2). 

3. Article 337. 

4. A.I.R. 195* S. a 561, 

5. In re Kerala Education Bill. A. I. R. 1958 S. C. 956. 

6. State of Bombay v. Bombay Education Society, A.I.R. 195'* S.C. 561. 

7. Article 334 (2). 



404 


CONSTITUTIONAL tAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


order, specify backward classes. The Special Officer for Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes then be asked to deal with Backward classes also. 

Under Article 15 (4) the State is empowered to make special provision* 
for the advancement of socially and educationally backward classes of citizen. 
Under Article 16 (4) the State is authorised to make provisions for the reserva- 
tion of posts for backward classes, if in the opinion of the State, they are not 
adequately represented in the service. 

The Constitution does not define the expression “backward class”. It Is 
for the Government to list the backward classes for purpose of Articles 15 (4) 
and 16 (4) There is no uniformity in the matter and each State lists the back- 
wards classes in its own way. The Backward Classes Commission appointed in 
1953, was asked to determine the criteria on the basis of which a class may be 
considered as a backward class. The Commission could not find a criteria for 
such classification. 

In Ham Krishna Singh v. State of Mysore * an order of the Government 
classified 95% of the total population of the State as backward classes. The 
classification was not based on social and economic backwardness hut on caste 
and religion. The Mysore High Court held the order Invalid. The court said 
that the determination by the Government with regard to backward classes is 
not final and court could examine the question as to whether the determination 
was based on an intelligible principle. The question whether a particular class 
of citizens is a backward or not is a justiciable issue." 

The Court can also examine whether the percentage of reservation provid- 
ed for backward classes in any particular service is reasonable. If the reserva- 
tion is found to be excessive, unreasonable or extravagant, it would be chal- 
lenged as fraud on the Constitution. 4 

In Derdasan v. Union oj India* the ‘Cany-forward Rule’ framed by 
Central Government was held invalid on the ground that the power vested in 
the State Government under Article 16 (4) canoot be so exercised as to deny 
reasonable equality of opportunity in matters of public employment to members 
of classes other than backwards. In this case the number of vacancies which 
came to be reserved by virtue of ‘Carry-forward Rule’ was nearly 68V of the 
total vacancies which was unreasonable and hence the rule was declared 
invalid. 

D. Llngnlstic Minorities. 

A linguistic minority as a class of people whose mother tongue is different 
from tbatoF the majority in the State or part of a State. The Constitution 
provides for the protection of the interests of linguistic minorities. 

Article 350-A imposes a duly on the States to endeavour to provide 
adequate facilities for instruction in the mother tongue at the primary stage of 
education to children belonging to linguistic minority. The President is 


1. Article 338 (3). 

2. A. I. R. 1963 Mys 338. 

3. Triloki Nath v State of 3. & K. p A. I. R. 1967 S. C. 1283. 

4. Dalaji v. State of Mysore, A. I R. 1961 S. C 649-In this case a reservation of 68 

per cert of seats in educational institutions by the State was held invalid. 

5 S C M30 9MS ' C ’ 179, f ° J,0WedinD ’ N ' Tew9riv Union of India, A. I. R 1965 



34] 


SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN CLASSES 


405 


authorized to issue such directions to any State, as he considers necessary or 
proper for securing the provisions of such facilities. 

Article 347 provides for the use of majority language in the administra- 
tion. If a demand is made in this behalf and the President is satisfied that a 
substantial proportion of (he population of a State desire the use of any lang- 
uage spoken by them to be recognized by the State, the President may direct 
that such language, shall also be officially recognized throughout the State or 
any part of the Stale for such purposes as he may specify. 

Article 350 gives right to every person to submit a representation for the 
redress of any grievance to any officer or authority of the Union or a State in 
any of the languages used in the Union or a State, as the case may be. 

Article 350-B empowers the President to appoint a Special Officer for 
Linguistic Minorities. It is the duty of the Special Officer to investigate all 
matter relating to the safeguards provided for Linguistic Minorities under this 
Constitution and report to the President upon those matters at such intervals 
as the President may direct. The President shall cause reports to be laid 
before each House of Parliament and send to the Government of the State 
concerned. 



35 

Official Language 
(RrtB. 343 to 351) 

The Official Language of the Union shall be Hindi in Devn3gri Script 
but the foim of numericals to be used for the official purposes of Union shall 
be the International form of Indian numericals.* However, for s period of 
fifteen years from the commencement of the Constitution the English Language 
shall continue to be used for all the official purposes of the Union. Even after 
fifteen years, the Parliament may by law provide for the use of English Lan- 
guage for specified purposes.* Even during this period of fifteen years, the 
president may authorise the use of the Hindi Language, in addition to the 
English Language, and of the Devnagri forms of numericals for any official 
purposes or the Union. 

The Official Language of the Union shall be the official language for 
communication between one State and other and between a State and the 
Union, 8 but two or more States may agree to have Hindi as the Official Lan- 
guage for communication amongst them. 

Article 345 provides that the Legislature of a State may by law adopt any 
one or more of the language* in use in the State or Hindi as the language or 
languages to be used for all or any of the official purposes of that State. 

Directive for the Development of the Hindi Language.— Article 351 im- 
poses a duty on the Union to promote the spread of the Hindi Language, to 
develop it so that it may serve as a medium of expression for all the elements 
of the composite culture of India and to secure its enrichment by assimilating, 
without ioteifetiog with its genios, the forms, style and expression used in 
Hindustani and in other languages oflndiaandby drawing for its vocabulary 
primarily from Sanskrit and secondarily from other Languages. 

The Parliament may also provide the use of the Hindi Language in the 
proceedings of Supreme Court and High Courts. Until Parliament by law 
otherwise provides all proceedings in the Supreme Court and the High Courts 
and the authoritative Texts of Bills, Act, Order*, etc. shall be in English lan- 
guage. 4 The Governor of a State may, however, with the previous consent of 
the President, authorise the use of the Hindi Language or any other language 
for any official purposes of the State, in proceedings in the High Court exeept 
to any judgment, decree or order passed by the High Court. 8 For fifteen years 
from the commencement of the Constitution no bill or amendment making 
provision for the language to be used for any of those purposes ihall be intro- 
duced in either House of Parliament without the previous sanction of the 
President. The President will give bis sanction after taking into consideration 
the recommendation of the Language Commission and the report of the Com- 
mittee thereof, 8 

The Constitution imposes a duty on every State to provide adequate faci- 
lities for instructions in the mother tongue at the primary stage of education 
to children belonging to linguistic minority groups. 7 The President shall also 


Article M3 (t) 
Article 343 (3). 
Article 346 
Article 148. 
Article 348 (2) 
Article 349. 
Article 350-A. 



35] 


OfFlClAL LANGUAGE 


407 


appoint a special officer for linguistic minorities who will investigate all matters 
relating to the safeguards provided for linguistic minorities under the Cons- 
titution and report to the President upon those matters as the President may 
direct. 1 2 3 

_ IF a demand is made and the President is satisfied that a substantial pro- 
portion of the population of a State desire the use of any language spoken 
by them to be recognised by that State, he may direct that such language 
shall also be officially recognised in that State for such purpose as be may 
specify.* 

The Constitution also gives right to every person to submit a representa- 
tion for the redress of any grievance to any officer or authority of the Unioo 
or a State in any of the languages used in the Union or in the State as the case 
may be. s 

Article 344 provides for the appointment of a Commission on Official 
Language. At the expiration of five years from the commencement of the 
Constitution and after ten years, the President shall appoint a Commission. 
The Commission shall consist of a Chairman and other members representing 
the different languages. 4 

The Commission is to make recommendation to the President regarding 
following matters— 

(1) progressive use of the Hindi language for the official purposes of 
the Union ; 

(2) restrictions on the use of the English language for all or any of the 
official purposes of the Union ; 

(3) the language to be used for the proceedings ia the Supreme Court 
and the High Courts ; 

(4) the form of numericals to be used for any one or more specified 
purposes of the Union ; 

(5) any other matter referred to the Commission by the President as 
regards the Official Language of the Union and the language for communication 
between the Union and a State or between one State and another and their use. 

In making recommendation, under clause (2) the Commission shall have 
due regard to the industrial, cultural and scientific advancement of India, and 
the just claims and the interests of persons belonging to the non-Hmdi speaking 
areas in regard to the public services. There shall be constituted a Committee 
consisting of thirty members of whom twenty will be elected by the House of 
the People and ten by the Council of States, to examine the recommendations 
of the Commissioner and to report to the President their opinion thereon. After 
considering the leport of the Committee the President may issue directions in 
accordance with the whole or any part of the report. 

The languages which are constitutionally recognised are— Assamese, 
Bengali, Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Kashmiri, Malayalam, Marathi, Oriya, 
Punjabi, Sanskrit, Sindhi, Tamil, Telgu and Urdu. (Total 15) 

The Parliament has passed the Official Language Act, 1963, which 
provides for continued use of English for official purposes of the Union inde- 
finitely, notwithstanding the expiration of the period mentioned in Article 345, 
The change over to Hindi has thus been postponed indefinitely by permitting 

1. Article 350-B. 

2. Article 347. 

3. Article 350. 

4. Article 344 (4), (5), (6). 



CONSimmoNAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


the use of English as an additioaat official language for all purposes for which 
it has been so far used. The position will be reviewed only after Junuary 26, 
1975 . 

In Union of India v, Murasoli, 1 the respondents filed writ-petitions in the 
High Court for a declaration that the Presidential Order which requires train- 
ing of administrative personnel in Hindi while in service, is void. The Presi- 
dential Order made trainings in Hindi while in service compulsory for all 
Central Government employees below the age of 45 years. It was contended 
that the Presidential Order ceased to have any effect because the Second 
Language Commission was not appointed as required by Art. 344 of the Cons- 
titution. It was also contended that the Presidential Order was inconsistent 
with section 3 of the Official Language Act, 1963 iosamuch as they placed the 
respondent in a disadvantageous position on account of their having no pro- 
ficiency in Hindi language. The Supreme Court held that the Presidential 
Order was valid. It is erroneous to say that the Presidential Order of 1960 
became invalid after the passing of Official Language Act. The Presidential 
Order keeps in view the ultimate object to make Hindi Language as official 
language but takes into note the circumstances prevailing in our country and 
considered it desirable that the change should be gradual one and due regard 
should be given to the just claims and the interests of persons belonging to the 
non-Hindi speaking areas. The power to appoint Commissions under Art. 344 
cannot be said to be exhausted on the expiry of 15 years. The President can 
□se it on more than one occasions. The Presidential Order continues itself at 
the end of 15 years. It would be strange that the steps necessary for the 
change should be given up at the expiry of 15 years because a switch over from 
English to Hindi has not been possible and Parliament provided by law for the 
continued use of the English language. 

The Court also held that there is no inconsistency between the Presiden- 
tial Order and the Official Language Act. Arts. 343 and 344 deal with the 
process of transition. The ultimate aim is provided in Art. 345 which fulfils 
the object of the spread and development of the Hindi language. Art. 344 (6) 
takes into account this objective and is intended to determine the pace of 
progress and to achieve the same. The Act merely continues the use of the 
English language in addition to Hindi. The Act does put the limitation on the 
power of the President to issue directions under Art. 344 (6). The non-obsente 
clause in Art. 344 (6) empowers the President to issue such direction. Parlia- 
ment is legislating in different field. The field is the permissive use of English 
language in addition to Hindi during the period following 15 years because the 
change to Hindi could not be complete. The transitional period has exceeded 
15 years. The Presidential Order keeps in view the steps to replace the use of 
English language. The operation of the Act and the Presidential Order is, 
therefore, in different fields and has different purposes. The Act is to continue 
the use of English language after the expiry of 15 years. The Presidential 
Order on the other hand is to provide for the progressive use of the Hindi 
language. It confers an additional qualifications in those who learn Hindi and 
does not take away anything from the Government employees. Prizes are 
offered and there may be increase on pay. These are incentives. The conten- 
tion that the Presidential Order conflicts with Sec. 3 (4) of the Act is unsound 
The “In-service training” of the employees is during hours of duty and free of 
cost. Even if they fail there is no penalty. There is no treatment of unequals 
alike. 

The States are left free to adopt any language to be used for official pur- 
poses. 1 



36 

The Emergenoy Provisions 
(Arts. 352 to 360) 

One or the chief characteristics of the Indian Constitution is the way in 
which the normal Federal Constitution can be adapted to emergency situation. 
It is the merit of the Indian Constitution that it visualises the contingencies 
when the strict application of the federal principle might destroy the basic 
assumptions on which our Constitution is built. 

The Constitution of India provides for three types of emergencies : 

A. National Emergency — due to war. external aggresion or armed 
rebellion. (Art. 352). 

K. State Emergency— due to the failure of constitutional machinery in 
State. (Art. 356). 

C. Financial Emergency— (Art. 360). 

A. National Emergency.— Caused by war, exernal aggression and armed 
rebellion. (Art. 352)— Art. 352 as it exists after the 44th Amendment Act, 1978, 
provides that if the President is satisfied that a grave emergency exists where- 
by the security of India or any part oflodia is threatened, either by war or 
external aggression or armed rebellion, he may make a Proclamation of Emer- 
gency in respect of the whole of India or any part of India as may be 
specified in the Proclamation. The proclamation of Emergency made under 
clause (1) may be revoked or varied by the President by a subsequent Pro- 
clamation [CL (2)]. 

Clause (3) provides that the President shall not Issue a Proclamation of 
emergency unless the decision of the Cabinet (that is to say, the Council consist- 
ing of the Prime Minister and other Ministers of Cabinet rank appointed under 
Article 75, that such a proclamation may be issued has been communicated to 
him in writing, This means that the emergency can be declared only on the 
concurrence of the Cabinet, and not merely on the advice of the Prime Minister 
as was done by Smt. Indira Gandhi's Government in June, 1975. She had 
advised the President to proclaim emergency without consulting her Cabinet. 

The Proclamation of emergency must be laid before each Houses of 
Parliament and it shall cease to be in operation at the expiration of one 
month (prior to the 44th Amendment Act. I97S two months) unless before 
the expiry of one month it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses of 
Parliament. If the proclamation of emergency is issued at a time when the 
Lok Sabha b3S been dissolved or tbc dissolution or the Lok Sabba lakes place 
during the period of one month referred to above, without approving the 
proclamation, but the proclamation has been approved by the Rajya Sabha. 
the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of 30 days from the 
date on which the Lok Sabha sits after fresh election, unless before the expiry 
of the above period of 30 days a resolution approving the Proclamation has 
been passed by the Lok Sabha. [Chase (4)J A resolution approving the Pro- 
clamation must be passed by a special majority, that is by a majority of the 
total members of each House and also by a majority of not less than 2/3 of the 
Const. 52 



410 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA (Chap. 

members present and voting in each House. Prior to the _44fh Amendment, 
1978, such a resolution could be passed by Parliament by a simple majority. 

Clause (5) provides that once, the Proclamation of Emergency is approved 
by Parliament, it shall remain in force for a period of six months from the 
date of the passing of the second resolution approving it under clause (4), 
unless revoked earlier. . For the further continuance of the emergency beyond 
the period of sis months, approval by Parliament would be required every 
six months If the dissolution of the Lok dabha takes place during the period 
of six months without approving the further continuance of emergency, but it 
has been approved by the Rajya Sabha, the proclamation shall cease to operate 
at the expiry of 30 days after the Lok Sabha sits after fresh election unless 
before the expiry of the above period, it is approved by fhe Lok Sabha. Here 
also the resolution is required to be passed by the special majority referred to 
above. 

Clause (7) provides that President shall revoke a proclamation if the 
Lok Sabba passes a resolution disapproving it or disapproving its continuance. 
Clause (8) provides that where a notice in writing signed by not less than 
1/lQth of the total number of members of the Lok Sabha have been given their 
intention to move a resolution for disapproving the continuance of a proclama- 
tion of emergency— 

(a) to the Speaker, if the House is in session ; or 

(b) to the President, if the House is not in session ; 

a special sitting or the Lok Sabha shall be held within 14 days from the date 
on which such a notice is received by the Speaker or the President for the 
purpose of considering the resolution. In such a case the session must be 
convened for considering the resolution. Now, it i s not left to the discretion 
of tbe Government to convene or not a session of the Lok Sabha. 

The power conferred on the President by this Article shall include the 
power to issue different Proclamations on different grounds, either war or 
external aggression or armed rebellion or imminent danger thereof, whether or 
not there is a proclamation already issued by the President under clause (l) 
and such proclamation is in operation. (Clause 9). 

Grounds.— The President can proclaim emergency if he is satisfied that the 
security of India or any part thereof is threatened by either by war or external 
aggression or armed rebellion Prior to the 44th Amendment Act, 1978, one of 
the ground on which emergency could be declared under clause ( 1 ) was 
•'internal disturbance". The words "internal disturbance” were vague and gave 
wide discretion to tbe Executive to declare emergency even on flimsy grounds. 
In fact, Smt. Indira Gandhi, the then Prime Minister, had declared emergency 
on the ground that the security of India was threatened due to internal dis- 
turbance. The 44th Amendment has now substituted the words ‘‘armed 
rebellion” for the words "internal disturbance", which will exclude the possi- 
bility of a situation which arose in 1975- 

The Proclamation of Emergency can be made even before the actual 
concurrence of events contemplated in Art. 352 have taken place if the President 
is satisfied that there is imminent danger of war or armed rebellion. Thus the 
actual occurance of the events mentioned in Art. 352 are not essential. An 
imminent danger of war or external aggression or armed rebellion is enough 
for the declaration of emergency. [Explanation to Art. 352 (l)J. 

1. Gulam Sarwar v. Union of India. A. I. R. 1967 S. C 1335. 



36] 


THE EMIRGFNCY PROVISIONS 


411 


The “ satisfaction ’ that the security of India is threatened or there is an 
imminent danger of its being threatened by war or external aggression or armed 
rebellion is the “subjective satisfaction” of the President and cannot be 
challenged in a court of law and even on ground that the opinion of the Presi- 
dent had been actuated by mala fides. The President is the sole judge to 
decide whether circumstances exist justifying the proclamation of emergency. 

It is to be however noted that the word 'satisfaction’ used in Art. 352 does 
not mean the personal satisfaction of the President, but, it is the satisfaction of 
the Cabinet. Thus, the power to declare emergency can be exercised by the 
President only on the adivee of the Council of Ministers. This provision has 
further been strengthened by the addition of the Dew clause (3) to Art. 352 by 
the 44th Amendment Act, 1978. It makes it clear that the President shall 
declare emergency only on the written adivee of the Cabinet, and not merely 
on the advice of the Prime Minister, as was done by Smt. Indira Gandhi in 
June, 1975. She had advised the President to proclaim emergency without 
consulting her Cabinet. The members of the Council of Ministers were simply 
informed subsequenly about the proclamation of emergency which was a fait 
accompli. The object of clause (3) is to prevent the recurrence of such a situation 
in future. 

Emergency provisions vest a very great power in the Executive. In the 
Constituent Assembly, certain members had expressed the view that this power 
might be misused by the Executive. Dr. Ambedkar however said that the 
possibility that the emergency powers may be abused furnishes no ground 
for denial of emergency powers to the Executive. The power of Executive, 
however, is not unbriddled. He pointed oat that the Constitution itself provides 
certain safeguards against the abuse of emergency powers by the Executive, 
Firstly, it is to be exercised on the Council of Ministers who are representatives 
of the people. - Secondly, it must be laid before the Parliament and cannot 
remain in force beyond two months without its approval. A review of the past 
events, however, have amply made it clear that inspite of the several safeguards 
incorporated in the Constitution, the emergency provisions were misused. In 
1975 emergency provisions were used to perpetuate the rule of one party which 
was in power.' It is submitted that the effective safeguards against the abuse 
of emergency powers by the Executive are not constitutional provisions (even 
after the 44th Amendment, 1978) but the existence of an enlightened and 
vigilant public opinion. As promised to the electorate the Janata Government 
has enacted the 44th Amendment and Incorporated certain safeguards in the 
Constitution against any misuse of emergency powers by Government in 
future.® 

The 41th Amendment has amended article 352 and provided for various 
safeguards against abuse of emergency powers by the Government. The object 
of this amendment is to make it impossible the repetition of the 1975 situation 
when Smt. Indira Gandhi's Government declared emergency without any suffi- 
cient cause on the ground of "internal disturbance” and thousands and lakhs of 
innocent citizens were sent to jails only on the suspicion that their activities 
were likely in the opinion of the the Government to threaten the internal peace 
within the country. The members of the Janata Government were the worst 
sufferers and they had promised to the electorate to amend the Constitution 
and incorporate adequate provisions for preventing the recunence of the events 

j. D. K' Singh, Emergency and the Constitution of India, Indian Constitution Trends 
and Issues, p. 288. 

2. Insetted by the 41th Amendment Act, 1978, 



412 coNSTrrmioNAL law of India [Chap. 

during emergency. A brief summary of the 44th Amendment, as discussed 
above, is as follows ; 

1. The ground of "internal disturbance” has been substituted by the 
ground of “armed rebellion” these words will exclude the possibility of 
Emergency being proclaimed on the ground of "internal disturbance” only not 
involving armed rebellion. The words “internal disturbance” were vague and 
gave wide discretion to the Executive to declare emergency. After this amend- 
ment, a proclamation of emergency under Art. 352 will be possible ooly when 
the security of India is threatened by war or external aggression or armed 
rebellion. 

2. Clause (3) provides that the President shall not issue a proclamation 
of emergency unless the dedsioa of the Cabinet that such a proclamation may 
be issued has been communicated to him in writing. This means that the 
emergency can oDly be declared on the concurrence of the Cabinet, and not 
merely on the advice of the Prime Minister as was done by Sint. Indira Gandhi 
Government in June, 1975. She advised the President to proclaim emergency 
without consulting the Cabinet. 

3. Clause (4) provides that the proclamation of emergency will have to 
be approved within a period of one month (instead of two months as provided 
at present) by a resolution of both the Houses of Parliament. This means that 
tbc proclamation will automatically cease to operate at the expiry of one 
month unless before the expiry of that period it has been approved by Parlia- 
ment. Such a resolution should be passed by a majority of the total member- 
ship of each House and not less than 2/3 of the total membership of the 
members present and voting in each House. Prior to this, such a resolution 
could be passed by Parliament by a simple majority. 

4. Clause (5) says that once approved by Parliament, the proclamation 
shall remain in force for a period of six months. For that further the conti- 
nuance of the emergency beyond the period of six months, approval by 
Parliament would be required every six months. Piror to this amendment once 
approved by Parliament emergency could remain in operation for indefinite 
period, i. c., as long as the Executive wanted it to continue. 

5. It provides that a proclamation of , emergency shall cease to be 
operative whenever a resolution to that effect is adopted by the Lok Sabha by 
a simple majority of the members of the House present and voting. 

6. Clause (8) provides that where a notice in writing signed by not less 
than 1/10 of the total number, ot members of the Lok Sabha has been given 
of their intention to move a' resolution for approving or disapproving the 
continuance in force of a proclamation of emergency — 

(a) to the Speaker, if the House is in session ; or 

(b) to the President, if the House is not in session ; 

a special sitting of the House shall be held within 1 4 days from the date on 
which such notice is received by the Speaker or the President for the purpose of 
considering such resolution. In such cases the session must be convened for 
considering the resolution. It is no longer left to the discertion of the Govern- 
ment to convene or not a session of the House. 

7. Clause (5) of Article 352 added by the 42nd Amendment has been 
pmitte^, This clause made the 'satisfaction’ of the PresiJcnt final 



361 


THE EMERGENCY PEO VISIONS 


413 


8. Clause (9) provides that the power conferred on the President by 
this Article shall include the power to issue different proclamations on different 
grounds, war, or external aggression or armed rebellion or imminent danger 
thereof whether or not there is a proclamation already issued by the President 
under clause (1) and such proclamation is in operation. 

Territorial Extent of Proclamation. — Art. 352 enables the President to 
make a proclamation of emergency either ‘in respect of the whole of India 
or of such part of the territory thereof as may be specified’. These words 
were added by the 42nd Amendment Act, 1976, which now enables the 
President to confine the declaration of emergency to any part of the territory 
of India. 

Prior to this Amendment, it could be made to apply to the whole of 
India. If the situation becomes normal in any part of the country emergency 
could be revoked from that part of the country, but it may continue to operate 
in other parts of the country. 

Duration of Proclamation.— Prior to the 44th Amendment, 1978 a procla- 
mation of emergency could remain in force in the first instance for “two’' 
months. But once approved by Parliament emergency could remain in force 
indefinitely /. e. as long as the Executive wanted to continue. The 44th 
Amendment has curtailed the power of the Executive to prolong the operation 
of emergency unnecessarily. 

After the 44tb Amendment Act, a proclamation of emergency may remain 
in force in the first instance for “one” month. Such a proclamation, if 
approved by Parliament, shall remain in force for the period of "six months” 
unless revoked earlier. Clause (6) requires that the resolution approving the pro- 
clamation of emergency must be passed by cither House of Parliament by a 
special majority, that is, by a majority of the total membership of that 
House present and voting. For the further continuance of emergency beyond 
the period or six months, approval by Parliament would be required every 
six months. Thus after this Amendment the continuance of emergency docs 
not depend upon the discretion of the Executive. It cad now be done only 
with the approval of Parliament and that too by a special majority of the 
House. 

Effects of Proclamation of Emergency. — The following are the conse- 
quences of the Proclamation of Emergency : 

(1) Extension of Centre’* ExecntWe power (Art. 353).— During the opera- 
tion of a Proclamation of Emergency the executive power of the Union extends 
to giving of directions to any State as to the manner in which the executive 
pow er of the State is to be extreised.' 

The. Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 made a consequential 
change in Art. 353 following the amendment ro3de in Article 352. It provides 
that the executive power of the Union to give directions under clause (a) and 
the power to make laws under clause (b) shall also extend to any State other 
than the State where emergency is In force, if the security of India or any 
part of the territory is threatened by activities in or in relation to that part 
of the tarritory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in opera- 
tion. This clause has also been added to Articles 35S and 359 of the 
Constitut’on. 

In normal times, the executive power does not extend to giving such 
directions, subject to certain exceptions. 



414 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


(2) Parliament empowered to legislate on Slate Sabjects— (Art. 250),— 
While the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the Union Parliament 
is empowered to make laws with respect to any of the matters in the State 
List. The distribution of legislative power is thus fundamentally changed 
during emergency. The law-making power of the State is only suspended 
during the emergency. The State can make law but it is subject to the over- 
riding power of the Union Parliament. 

(3) Centre empowered to alter distribution of revenues between the Union 
and the States— (Art. 354).— The President may, while a Proclamation of 
Emergency is in operation by the order alter the financial arrangement between 
the State and the Union as provided in Articles 268 to 279. Every such order 
is to be laid before each House of Parliament and will come to an end by the 
end of the financial year in which the Proclamation of Emergency ceases to 
operate. 

(4) Extension of life of Lok Sabha— [Art. 83 (2)]. — While the Proclamation 
of Emergency is in operation, the President may extend the normal life of the 
Lok Sabha by a year each time upto a period not exceeding beyond six months 
after Proclamation ceases to operate. 

(5) Suspension of fondamental rights guaranteed by Art. 19.— Article 358 
provides for the suspension of the seven freedoms guaranteed to the citizens 
by Article 19 of the Constitution. It says that while a Proclamation of 
Emergency is in operation, nothing in Article 19 shall restrict the power of 
the State to make any law or to take any executive action abridging or taking 
away the rights guaranteed by Article 19 of the Constitution. It means that 
as soon as the Proclamation of Emergency is made the freedom guaranteed 
by Art. 19 are automatically suspended. 

Normally, the rights guaranteed by Article 19 cannot be taken away or 
abridged by any law of Parliament or State Legislature. But Article 19 ceases 
to restrict the legislative or the executive power of the Centre or the States 
for the period of emergency and any law made by the Legislature or any 
action taken by the Executive cannot be challenged on the ground that they 
are inconsistent with the rights guaranteed by Article 19. As soon as the 
Proclamation of Emergency ceases to operate, Atticle 19 which remains suspen- 
ded during emergency, automatically comes into life and begins to operate 
and any law inconsistent with Article 19 made during emergency ceases to 
have effect to the extent of the inconsistency except as respects things done or 
omitted to be done before the law so ceases to have effect. But no action will 
lie for anything done during the emergency even after the emergency is over.. 

The 44th Amendment Act, 1978.— has made two important changes in 
Article 358 : (1) Firstly, in Clause (1) of Article 358, for the words — “While a 
Proclamation of Emergency Is in operation” the Amendment substitutes the 
following words — “While a Proclamation of Emergency declaring that the 
security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by war or by 
external aggression is in operation.” 

This means that under Article 358, Article 19 will be suspended only 
when a Proclamation of Emergency is declared on the ground of war or 
external aggression and not when emergency is declarded on the ground of 
armed rebellion which has been added to this Article by the 44th Amendment. 

(2) Secondly, it inserts a new clause (2) in Article 358 which says that— 
Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to — 



36 } 


TUB EMERGENCY IROYSS'ONS 


415 


"(a) to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that such 
law in relation to the Proclamation of Emergency when it is made, or 

(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law containing 
such recital. This clause makes it clear that Article 353 will only protect emer- 
gency laws from being challenged in a court oflaw and not other laws which 
are not related to the emergency. Prior to this, the validity of even other 
laws not related to emergency could not be challenged under Article 358. 

The proclamation of emergency however, docs not validate a law which 
was invalid before the proclamation of emergency. 1 

In M. M. Phathak v. Union of India, 3 the Supreme Court had an occasion 
to consider the effect of the expression “the things done or omitted to be done" 
in Article 3S8 after the Proclamation of Emergency ceases. In that case a 
settlement was arrived at between the Life Insurance Corporation of India and 
its employees in 1971 under which the LIC agreed to pay a case bonus to 
its employees. In 1976, however, by the LIC (Modification of Settlement) Act 
passed by Parliament during emergency the settlement was made ineffective 
and the employees could not demand their bonus while the emergency was in 
force. The employees of the LIC challenged the constitutional validity of the 
LIC (Modification of Settlement) Act, 1976. 

The Supreme Court held that the effect of Proclamation of Emergency on 
fundamental rights is that the rights guaranteed by Articles 14 and 19 are 
not suspended during emergency but their operation is only suspended. This 
means that only the validity of an attack based on Articles 14 and 19 is suspend- 
ed during the emergency. But once this embargo is liflcd Articles 14 and 19 
of the Constitution whose use was suspended, would strike down any legislation 
which would have been had. In other words, the declaration of validity is 
stayed during the emergency. 

The expression “the things done or omitted to be done’* occurring in 
Article 358 does not mean that the right conferred under the settlement is 
washed off completely. The expression it to be interpreted very narrowly. 
Therefore, as soon as the emergency is over, the settlement would revive and 
what could not be demanded during the period of emergency would become 
payable even for the period of emergency for which payment was suspended, 
otherwise the enactment will have effect even after the emergency had ceased. 
This would, the court said, clearly be contrary to the express provision of 
Articles 353 and 359 (1). In other words, valid claims cannot be washed off by 
the emergency per se. They can only be suspended by a law passed daring the 
operation of Articles 358 and 359 (I). 

6. Suspension of right of enforcement of fundamental rights (Art. 359). — 
Article 359 empowers the President to suspend the right to enforce fundamental 
rights guaranteed by Part HI of the Constitution. It says that while the Pro- 
clamation of Emergency is in operation, the President may by order declare that 
the right to move any court »for the enforcement of such of the fundamental 
rights as may be mentioned in the order ( except Articles 20 aid 2l\ 3 and alf 
proceedings pending in any court for the enforcement of such rights shall 
remain suspended for the period of Proclamation is in force or for such shorter 

». Ikneit Coleman & Co. *. Uoktt of India. A. I. R. 197} S. C. 106. 

2. A. I. R. 1978 S. C BO). 

3, Added by the 44th Amendment Act, 197S. 



416 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA [Chap. 


period as may be specified in the order. An order suspending the enforcement 
of fundamental rights m3y extend to the whole or any part of the territory 
of India [Clause 12)]. An order made under clause (1) shall, ns soon as 
possible, be laid before each House of Parliament. 

The Constitution (38th Amendment Act, 1975, has added a new clause 
(1A) in Art. 359 which provides that while an order under clause (1) is in 
operation, nothing in Part HI shall restrict the power of the State to make any 
law or to take any executive action. Any such law shall cease to have effect 
to the extent of incompctcncy, as soon as the order ceases to operate except 
as respects things done or omitted to be done before the law so ceased to have 
effect. 

The 44th Amendment Act, 1978.— The Amendment substitutes the 
following words in clauses (1) and (1A) the rights conferred by Part HE 
(except Articles 20 and 21) for the words “the rights conferred by Part III". 
After Clause (1 A) a new Clause (IB) has been inserted which provides that 
Article 359 shall not apply (a) to any law which does not contain a declaration 
that such a law is in relation to the Proclamation of Emergency in operation 
when made, or (b) to any executive action taken otherwise than under 
a law containing such a rrcital. The Amendment thus makes two significant 
changes : 

Firstly, it provides that under Article 359 the President does not have the 
power to suspend the enforcement of the right to life and personal liberty under 
Artitle 21 of the Constitution. In future, Article 21 cannot be su, pended during 
emergency. Secondly, it provides that suspension of any fundamental rights 
under Article 359 will not apply in relation to any law which does not contain 
a declaration that such a law is in relation to the Proclamation of Emergency in 
operation when it is made or to any executive action taken otherwise than 
under a law containing such a recital. Thus laws not related to the emergency 
can be challenged in a court of law. 

This Amendment is a sequel to the decision of the Supreme Couit in the 
Habeas Corpus case. The amendment is intended to remove the reoccurrence 
of such a situation in future. 

It is to be noted that unlike Art. 358 under Art. 359 the suspension of 
right to move any court for the enforcement or fundamental rights is not 
automatic. It can only be brought about by a Presidential order. 

In September 1962, China attacked India. On 26ih October, 1962. the 
President of India issued a Proclamation of Emergency under Article 352 (1) 
declaring that a grave emergency exists whereby the security of India is threa- 
tened by ‘external aggression*. 

On 3rd November, 1962, the President issued an order under Article 359 
(1) which ran thus : 

“In exercise of the powers conferred by clause ( l ) of Article 359 of the 
Constitution, the President hereby declares that the right of any 
person to move any court for the enforcement of the rights 
conferred by Articles 14, 21 and 22 of the Constitution shall remain 
suspended for the period during which the emergency issued under 
Article 352 (l ) on 26th October, 1962 is in force, if such person 
lias been deprived of any such rights under the Defence of India 
Act, 1962, or any rule or order made thereunder." 



36} THE EMERGENCY PROVISIONS 417 

In A Takhan Singh v. Slate of . Punjab , l Makhan Singh and others were 
detained under the Defence of India Act, 1962. They applied to the High 
Court under section 491 (1) (b) of the Criminal Procedure Code and alleged 
that they had been improperly and illegally detained because the Defence of 
India Act and the Rules made thereunder contravene their Fundamental Rights 
under Articles 14, 21 and 22. Their petitions were dismissed by the High 
Court, on the ground that the Presidential Order issued under Article 359 
created a bar, which precluded them from moving the High Court under section 
491(l)(b), Criminal Procedure Code. They went in appeal to the Supreme 
Court. The two important questions for decision by the Supreme Court were : 

(1) What is the true scope and effect of the Presidential Order issued 
under Article 359 (1) 1 

(2) Does the bar created by the Presidential Order operate in respect of 
the applications made by the detenues under section 491 (1) (b) of the Criminal 
Procedure Code ? 

In construing Article 359 the Court considered it relevant and useful to 
compare and contract the provisions of Article 35S and Article 359. 

(1) Under Article 358 as soon as the Proclamation of Emergency is 
issued under Article 352 and so long as it lasts. Article 19 is suspended, and 
the power of the Legislatures as well as the Executive to that extent is made 
wider. Although Article 19 will revive and become operative as soon as the 
proclamation ceased to operate, but Article 358 expressly provides that ‘things 
done or omitted to be done during the emergency’ cannot be challenged even 
after the emergency is over. Thus suspension of Article 19 is complete during 
the perioc of emergency and Legislative and Executive action which contra- 
venes Article 19 cannot be questioned even after the emergency is over. Article 
359, on the other hand, does not suspend any Fundamental Right, but merely 
authorises the President to issue an order declaring that the right to move any 
court for the enforcement of such Fundamental Rights as may be mentioned in 
the order, shall remain suspended for the period during which the proclamation 
is in force or for such shorter period as may be specified in the order. The 
rights are not suspended, but the citizen is deprived of his right to move any 
court for their enforcement. The said rights are theoretically alive. 

(2) While the suspension of Article 19 under Article 358 applies to the 
whole country and so covers all Legislatures and States, the order under Article 
352 (1) may extend to the whole of India or may be confined to any part of the 
territory of India. 

(3) While the suspension of Article 19 under Article 3i9 continues for the 
entire period of emergency, the suspension of the right to move any court will 
ensue for the period of the emergency, or for a shorter period, if so specified by 
the Presidential Order. 

(4) While Article 358 provides that things done or omitted to be done 
during the emergency cannot be challenged even after the emergency is over, the 
position under Article 359 is different. As soon as the order issued under 
Article 352 ceases to be operative, any infringement made by the Legislative or 
Executive action is liable to challenge on the basis that those rights were in 
operation even during the pendency of the Presidential Order, unless an appro- 
priate Act of Indemnity is passedby Parliament. 


t. A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 381. 
Const. 53 



418 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


Coming to the Hue scope and effect of Atticle 359, the Couct said that it 
is impossible to aecept the contention that only right that can be suspended 
by an Order made under Article 359 (1) is the right guaranteed by Article 32(1), 
to mo\e the Supreme Court for the enforcement of any of the Fundamental 
Rights, and a citizen would be free to seek relief from a High Court under 
Article’ 226. Article 359 uses the word “any court”, which does not mean 
only the Supreme Court but roust include all courts of competent jurisdiction. 
The use of the expression “any court” cannot be justified by a reference to 
Articte 32 (3) which enables Parliament to empower any other court to exercise 
all or any of the powers exercisable by the Supreme Court under Article 32 (2). 
Article 32 (3) clearly shows that the other courts empowered by the Parliament 
cannot have the same status as the Supreme Court to which alone Article 32 (1) 
is applicable. Hence the words “any court” in Article 359 (l) would include 
the Supreme Court as well as the High Courts before whom the specified rights 
can be enforced by citizens. 


The Supreme Court, however, took the precaution of pointing out that 
a citizen would not be deprived of his right to move the appropriate court for 
a writ of habeas corpus if his detention bas been ordered mala fide. The deten- 
tion can also be challenged on the grounds of infringement of those rights 
conferred by Part 111 which have not been mentioned in the Presidential 
Order. Similarly, ir the detenue contends that the provisions of Defence of 
India Act and the Ordinance under which he Is detained suffer from excessive 
delegation his plea raised cannot be barred by the Presidential Order because 
it is a plea which does not relate to the fundamental rights mentioned in the 
Order. 


In Maharashtra Stale v. Prabhakar ,» the Supreme Court held that if a 
person was deprived of his personal liberty not under the Defence of India Act 
or any rule made thereunder but in contravention thereof his right to move the 
said courts in that regard would not be suspended. 

Similarly, in Ram Manohar Lohia v. State of Bihar* the Supreme Court 
held the order of detention under the Defence of India Rules illegal on the 
ground that the order of detention was inconsistent with the conditions laid 
down in the Defence of India Rules. In this case Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia was 
detained by an order of District Magistrate to whom the power was delegated 
by the Government under section 40 (2) of the Defence of India Act, 1962. 
The order stated that the D. M. was satisfied that with a view to prevent the’ 
petjtioner from acting in any manner prejudicial to the “public safety and the 
maintenance of law and order" it was necessary to detain him. The expression 
used ‘for this purpose’ under the Defence of India Rules was “public safety and 
maintenance of public order". 


The Court held that the order of the President does not form a bar to 

all applications for release from detention under the Act or the Rules Where 
a person was detained in violation of the mandatory provisions of the" Defence 
of India Act his right to move the court was not suspended. The petitioner 
contended that the order of detention was not justified under the Act or Rules 
and was, therefore, against the provisions of the Aci. The petitioner was there- 
fore entitled to be beard. 


The order detaining the petitioner 
unless it could be said that the expression 


would not be in terms of the Rute 
“law and order” means the same 


J. A.I.R. 1966 S.C. 724. 
2. Ibid. 



36] HIE FMERGENCV PBOVMONS 419 

thing as “public order”. What was meant by maintenance of public order was 
the prevention of disorder of a grave nature, a disorder which the authorities 
thought was necessary to prevent in view or the emergent situation created by 
external aggression ; whereas the expression “maintenance of law and order” 
may mean prevention of disorder of comparatively lesser gravity and of local 
significance only. 

In Mohd. Yaqub v. Stale of Jammu and Kashmir, 1 the Supreme Court held 
that an order made by the President under Article 359 (1) is not ‘law* within 
the meaning of Article 13 (2) and, therefore, its validity cannot be challenged 
with reference to the provisions of Part III. Thus ir the order suspends the 
enforcement of Article 14, it cannot be challenged on the ground that it is 
discriminatory under Article 14. The validity of the order cannot be tested 
under the very fundamental rights, t. e., Article 14 which it suspended. The 
Supreme Court thus overruled its own decision in Chulam Samar v. Union of 
India* wherein it had held that the Presidential Order issued under Article 359 
(1) could be challenged as being discriminatory order. 

The emergency proclaimed in 1962 continued up to January 10, 1968. 
The emergency was again proclaimed In 1971 when Pakistan attacked India, 
and continued in operation up to March 1977. On 26th June, 1975, the 
President declared emergency on the ground that the security of India was 
threatened due to ‘internal disturbances’. , 

This Proclamation of Emergency was in addition to the emergency 
declared in 1971 relating to external aggression which continued up to 
March 1977. The Constitution (38th Amendment) Act, 1975, added a new 
clause (4) to Art. 352 which declared that the power under clause (1) included 
the power to issue different proclamations on different grounds whether or 
not a proclamation has already been Issued and is in operation. 

On June 27, 1975 the President issued an order under Article 359 (1) as 
follows : 

“In exercise of powers conferred by clause (1) of Article 359 the 
President hereby declares that the right of any person (including a 
foreigner) to move any court for the enforcement of the rights 
conferred by Articles 14, 21 and 22 and all proceedings pending 
in any court for the enforcement of the above-mentioned rights 
shall remain suspended for the period during which the Proclama- 
tion of Emergency made under clause (1) of Article 352 on the 3rd 
December and 25th June are both in force.” 1 - 

In A. D. A/., Jabalpur v. S. Shukla ,* popularly known as the habeas corpus 
case the respondents challenged the validity of the Proclamation of Emergency 
by the President under Article 352 made on 25th June. 1975. and the order 
of detention made against them thereunder. The respondents were detained 
under section 3 or the M1SA. They filed applications in different High 
Courts for the issue of writ or habeas corpus. A preliminary objection was 
raised on behalf of the State that the President’s Order was a bar to invoke the 
writ jurisdiction of the High Courts. The High Courts held that notwithstand- 
ing the continuance of emergency and the Presidential Order suspending the 

I A. I. R. 1968 S. C 765 (overruling Ghulam Sarwar v. Union of India, A. I. R. 1968 
S.’ C. 1335. 

2. A. I. R. 1968 S. C. 1335. 

3 . A- 1- R- 1976 S. r , I2P7, 



420 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


|Chap. 


enforcement of lights conferred by Articles 19, 21 and 22 the High Court can 
examine whether an order of detention i* in accordance with the provisions 
of the MIS A or whether the order was mala fide or was made on the basis of 
relevant materials by which the detaining authority could have satisfied that the 
order was necessary. The State appealed to the Supreme Court. 

The main questions for the consideration of the Supreme Court were two : 
Firstly, whethenn view of the Presidential Order, dated 27th June, 1975 and 
8th January, 1976 under clause (1) of Article 359 any writ-petition under 
Article 226 before a High Court for habeas corpus to enforce the right to 
pecscnaULbecty ora person detained under the Act on the ground that the 
order of detention is not in compliance with the Act. Secondly, if such a 
petition is maintainable what is the scope of judicial security particularly in 
view of the Presidential Order mentioning Art. 22 and section I6A of the 
M1SA. Section 16A of MISA prohibits the detaining authority to communi- 
cate grounds of detention to the detenue. 

The Supreme Court by a 4 : 1 majority {A. N. Ray, C. J., Beg. Chandra- 
chud and Ilhagwati, J J.) — Khanna, J. dissenting) held that in view of the 
Presidential Order, dated 27th June, 1975 no person has any locus standi (legal 
right) to move any writ-petition under Article 226 before a High Court for 
habeas corpus or any other writ or order or direction to challenge the legality 
of an order of detention on the ground that the order is not under or in 
compliance with the Act or is illegal or is vitiated by malafides factual or legal 
or is based on extraneous considerations. 

The respondents bad argued that the present appeal should be decided 
In the light of the Court's rulings in the hfakhan Singh case, in hfakhan Singh's 
case the Court had held that if a detenue challenged his detention on the ground 
that it violated statutory provisions or the detention is vitiated by malafides 
the challenge could not be barred because of the Presidential Order, under 
Article 359 (l). 

The Court however, held that the Supreme Court decision in hfakhan 
Singh’s case does not apply in the present case. The 1962 Presidential Order 
was a conditional order as it related to only those persons who had been 
detained under Defence of India Act. The Presidential Order issued on June 
27, 1975 was a "blanket” order and was not confined to persons detained 
under a particular law. Mr. Justice Khanna in his dissenting judgment 
however, observed, "the difference in phraseology of the Presidential Order 
dated June 27, 1975 and that of the 1952 Presidential Order would not justify 
the conclusion that because of the new Presidential Order a detention order 
need not comply with the requirements of the law providing for preventive 
detention”. 

It was also argued that the object of Article 359 (1) is to bar moving 
the Supreme Court under Ait. 32 for the enforcement of, without effecting in 
any manner the enforcement of common law and statutory rights to personal 
liberty under Article 226 before the High Court. In brief, the contention was 
that Article 21 is not the embodiment of rights to personal liberty. The Court, 
however, rejected this argument and held that Art. 21 is the sole repository of 
the right to life and personal liberty. The moment the right to move aoy Court 
for enforcement of the Article is suspended, no one can move any court for 
any redress. 

The Court has also made important observations on the question whether 
the *1*1? of emergency resulting from lh<? Presidential Ocdei can be equated 



36J 


THE EMERGENCY PROVISIONS 


421 


with Martial Law. It was argued that if the jurisdiction of courts to enforce 
the right to personal freedom is affected, the resulting position would be no 
different from that, which prevails when Martial Law is declared. The 
Court however did not agree with the contention or the petitioner. Beg., J. 1 
observed, “There is no provision’ 1 in our Constitution for a declaration of 
Martial Law. Nevertheless Article 34 of the Constitution recognises the pos- 
sibility of Martial Law in this country. Martial Law cannot be equated with 
conditions under emergency particularly after the Presidential Order under 
Article 359(1). Firstly, a Presidential Order under Article 359 (I) has a 
wider range and effect (prior to the 42nd Amendment Act, 1976) throughout 
the counlry than the existence of Martial Law in a particular part of the 
country. Martial Law is generally of a locally restricted application. Second- 
ly, the conditions in which Martial Law may prevail result jo taking over by 
Military Courts of powers even to try offences ; and the ordinary or civil 
courts will not interfere with the special jurisdiction under extraordinary 
conditions. Such a takingover by Military Courts is certainly outside the 
provisions of Article 359 (I) of the Constitution. It would perhaps fall under 
Presidential powers under Articles 53 and 73 read with Article 355 of the 
Constitution. 

Distinction between Arts. 358 and 359. 

While Art. 358 propio rigore (automatically) suspends the fundamental 
rights guaranteed by Art. 19 thus enabling the State to make laws in violation 
of Art. 19 and to take executive action under those laws despite the fact that 
those laws constitute an infringement of tbe rights conferred by Art. 19. 
Article 359 (1) does not suspend any fundamental rights of its own force but 
authorises tbe President to deprive an individual of bis right to approach any 
court for enforcement of any or all of tbe rights conferred by Part 111 of the 
Constitution. 

Thus Article 359 (1) which makes no distinction between the threat to 
the Security of India by war or external aggression or armed rebellion 
is wider in scope than Art. 358 and it is not open to any one cither to challenge 
tbe validity of any law or any executive action on the ground of violation of 
a fundamental right specified in the Presidential Order promulgated under 
Article 359 (1).* 

A'. A Duty of the Union to protect States— Article 355 imposes a duty on 
the Union to protect every State against external aggression and internal distur- 
bance and to ensure that the Government of every State is carried on in 
accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. 

Article 355 thus imposes the .following two obligations on the Central 
Government : 

(1) The duty to protect States from internal disturbance and extenal 
aggression. Such provisions are also found in other federal 
Constitutions, 1. e. America, Australia. But in America and 
Australia the Centre acts only when the request is made by States, 
while there is no such pre-condition under Article 355, The Centre 

. can thus interfere even without the State’s request. 

(2) The duty to see that the Government of every State is carried on 
in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. Tbe Cons- 

J. A. D. M., Jabalpur v. S. Shukla, A. L R. 1976 S. C. 1207 at p. 1318. 

2, Union of India v. Bhanudas, A. I. R. 1977 S. C. 1207. 



412 cotismunoHAL t_iw or India (Chap. 

titutions of U. S. A. and Australia also contain such provisions, 
It is this duty in performance of which the Centre takes over the 
Government of State under Art. 356 in case of failure of the 
constitutional machinery in the State. In other federations, 
however, the Centre cannot do so. 

B. Failure of constitutional machinery in Stale. — Article 356 says that 
if the President, on receipt of a report from the Governor of a State or other- 
wise, is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the Government of the 
State cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitu- 
tion, he may issue a proclamation. By that proclamation : 

(V) The President may assume to himself all or any of the powers 
vested in or exercisable by the Governor to any body or authority 
In the State, 

(2) The President may declare that the powers of the Legislature of 

the State shall be exercisable by or under the authority of 
Parliament. ' , 

(3) The President may make such incidental and consequential 
provisions as may appear to him to be necessary or desirable for 
giving effect to the objects of proclamation. 

The President cannot, however, assume to himself, any of the powers 
vested in a High Court or suspend the operation of any provisions of the Cons- 
titution relating to the High Court. 

Where by the proclamation under Article 356 (1) the powers of the State 
Legislature are to be exercised by Parliament. Parliament can confer on the 
President the power to make laws for tbe States. Parliament may also authorise 
the President to delegate such power to any other authority as specified by 
himself.' If the Lok Sabba is not in session the President may authorise 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of State, pending sanction of such 
expenditure by Parliament. 

The Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 has substituted a new 
clause in place or clause (2) of Article 357. This Is a saving clause which says 
that any law made by Parliament or the President or any authority in exercise 
of the powers of the State Legislature under Article 356 shall continue in 
force until altered, repealed or amended by tbe competent Legislature or other 
authority. 

It is to be noted that under Article 356 the President acts on a report of 
tbe Governor or otherwise. This means that the President can act even with- 
out the Governor’s report. This is justified in view of the obligation of the 
Centre imposed by Art. 355 to ensure that the Government of the State is 
'carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. In view of 
it the Centre’s ultimate responsibility to protect the constitutional machinery 
of the States, the framers thought it proper not to restrict and confine the 
action of the Centre merely on the Governor’s report. The Governor might 
not sometimes make a report. The President can, therefore, act even without 
the Governor’s report, if he is satisfied that such events have occurred in a 
State, which involve the special responsibility placed upon the Centre to main- 
tain the State under the Constitution. 


1. Article 357 (l){a) 



361 


THE EMB GENCY PROVISIONS 


423 


A proclamation issued under Article 356 shall be laid before each House 
of Praliamenc and shall remain in operation for ‘2 months. Unless before 
the expiry of that period it has been approved by both Houses of Parliament. 
Any such proclamation may be revoked or varied by a subsequent proclama- 
tion. If any such proclamation is issued at a time when the Lok Sabha is 
dissolved or the dissolution takes place during the period of 2 months and 
tbe proclamation is passed by the Rajya Sabba but not passed by the Lok 
Sabha, the proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiry of 30 days from 
tbe date on which the new Lok Sabha meets after the reconstruction unless 
before the expiry of 30 days it has been also passed by the Lok Sabha. If 
the proclamation is approved by the Parliament it will remain in operation for 
“ six months". Parliament may extend the duration of proclamation for “six 
months” at a time but no such proclamation shall in any case remain 
in force for more than three years. After the expiry of the maximum period 
of »three-years. neither the Parliament nor the President shall have power 
to continue a proclamation and the constitutional machinery must be restored 
to the State. 

The Constitution (44th Amendment) Act, 1978 has amended Article 356 and 
restricted its scope. It substitutes the words ‘six months’ for the words *'one 
year” as it existed originally. Thus it restores the position as it stood before the 
42 Amendment. A proclamation of emergency will, if approved by Parliament, 
continue for six months from the date of the issue. For the further continuation 
of emergency, it must be approved by Parliament each time for a period of six 
months. It has added a new clause (5) to Art. 356 in place of the existing 
clause (5) which is now omitted. This clause (5) provided that a resolution for 
the continuance of the emergency beyond one year shall not be passed by either 
House of Parliament unless— (a) a proclamation of emergency is in operation at 
the time of the passing of such resolution ; and (b) the Flection Commission 
certifies that the continuance in force of the proclamation under Art. 356 during 
tbe period specified in such resolution is necessary on account of difficulties in 
holding general elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned. 
This means that tbe extension of the emergency beyond the period of one 
year only be possible if the conditions mentioned in clause (5) are present. 
Prior to this Amendment there was no such condition imposed and the Govern- 
ment could extend the period upto the maximum of 3 years without sufficient 
cause. 

Since the commencement of tbe Constitution the President's rule had 
been imposed under Article 356, on several occasions. In most of the cases, it 
has been imposed in the circumstances in which stable ministry could not be 
formed, e. g., in 1951 in Punjab, in 1953 ia Pcpsu, in 1954 in Andhra Pradesh, 
in 1956 in Travancore-Cochin, in 1961 in Orissa, in 1964 in Kerala, in 1967 in 
Rajasthan, in 1968 in Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Bihar and Punjab, in 1969 
in Bihar. In West Bengal for the’second time, in 1970 on the resignation of 
Sri Ajoy Mukherji.Chicf Minister of tbe United Front Ministry. In U. P., 
second lime in 1970 when Chief Minister, Mr. Charan Singh refused to resign 
when he had lost the majority. He had advised the Governor to dismiss 14 
Ministers of his cabinet in the BKD-Ccngress Coalition Ministry. In Orissa 
second time in 1971, when the Chief Minister resigned and his advice for dis- 
solution of Assembly was not accepted by the Governor. In Mysore in 1971, 
in Gujarat in 1971, in Punjab fourth time in 1971, in Tripura in 1971, in Bihar 
in 1971, in Andhra Pradesh in 1973. In Orissa for the third time on March 
3, 1973 when the Chief Minister Nandmi Satpathi had to resign due to 
defection. In 1973 it was imposed in Manipur owing to defection. In 1973 
President rule was imposed in U. P. when the Chief Minister Mr. Kamla Pati 



424 


CONST! rUttONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


Tripathi had to resign due to the moral responsibility of the ministry for 
the Police revolt. In 1974, the President rule was imposed in Gujarat due 
to student’s agitation demanding dissolution of Assembly. In 1975 it was 
imposed in Uttar Pradesh to solve party disputes. In 1976 it was imposed 
in Tamil Nadu on the ground that according to the Governor’s report, the 
Tamil Nadu Government had disregarded the directions of the Central Govern- 
ment in relation to the emergency and has misused the emergency powers. 
The report also said that D. M. K. Ministry had by a series of acts of mal- 
administration, corruption and misuse of power for achieving partisan ends 
set at naught all canons of justice and equity which are balmark of democratic 
administration The action of the Centre cannot be held as democratic one 
because the ministry enjoyed the full confidence of the Legislature as well as 
the confidence of the people. 

In 1959 the president rule was imposed in Kerala in a peculiar circum- 
stance. The Communist Ministry was dismissed on the ground that it bad lost 
the confidence of the people, although it enjoyed the confidence of the Legisla- 
ture. There was a widespread agitation against the Government and the law 
and order situation was beyond the control of the State Government justifying 
the imposition of the President rule. The action of the Central Government 
has been subject to criticism. 

In 1967 in Haryana, and in 1975 in Nagaland President rule was imposed 
due to defections In 1966 President rule was imposed in Punjab as a result 
of the bifurcation of the State into Punjab and Haryana and in Goa for holding 
an opinion poll. 

In 1976, President rule was imposed in two States, Gujarat and Orissa. 
In Gujarat it was imposed because or the failure of the coalition ministry due 
to defections. In 1976, in Orissa, like Uttar Pradesh, this article was invoked 
to solve party disputes. The Chief Minister Mr. Satpathy was asked to resign 
by the Congress High Command because she bad defied certain direction of 
the High Command. The State Assembly was not dissolved but was kept 
under suspended animation. This was the fourth time that the State of Orissa 
came under President’s rule, the last three occasions being the years. 1961, 
1971 and 1973. 

The President rule was imposed in Assam on December 12. 1979 on the 
ground that no government was possible due to defection. The Janata Ministry 
led by Mr. G. Boibora which assumed office after elections in 1978 resigned 
in September following defection From the party. It was succeeded by a 
newly formed regional party— Asom Janata Dal— consisting mostly of dessideDt 
Janata members. The Assam Dal headed by Mr. Hazarika came to power 
with the support of the Congress, C. P. I. and Progressive Democratic front. 
The Hazarika Ministry was reduced to minority when Congress and C. P. I. 
withdrew their support. Thereupon, on the report of the Governor, "the 
Ministry was dismissed and the President rule was imposed in the State. * 

Nine Assemblies Dissolution in 1977. 

In 1977, Article 356 was invoked in very peculiar circumstances. The 
Assemblies of 9 States of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, 
Bibar, Himachal Pradesh, Onssa, West Bengal and Haryana, were dissolved 
aud President rule was imposed on the ground that the Assemblies in these 
States no longer represent the wishes of the electorate. The facts which led 
to the dissolution of the nine Assemblies were as follows : The Lok Sabha in 
which Congress had an overwhelming majority was dissolved oa Jan. 18, 1977 



36] 


thfl EMERGENCY PROVISIONS 


425 


and fresh elections were held in March 1977 in which the ruling Congress 
Party was completely routed and the Janata Party secured a landslide 
victory and formed the Government at the Centre. The Congress Party could 
not secure even a single Lok Sabba seat in several States. On the date 
on which the Janata Party took office, the Congress was in power in various 
States. On April 1977 Shri Charan Singh, the Union Home Minister, 
addressed a letter to the Chief Ministers of these States earnestly recommend- 
ing for their consideration that they should advice the Governors of tbeir 
respective States “to dissolve the State Assembly in exercise of the power 
under Art. 174 (2) (b) and seek a fresh mandate from the electorate.” It W3$ 
contended that since their party was virtually rejected in the recent Lok Sabha 
elections a serious doubt bad been cast on their enjoying the peoples confi- 
dence. When a legislature no longer reflects the wishes of the electorate he 
said, it should obtain a fresh mandate. 

Thereupon, six out of nine States filed suits under Art. 131 ia the 
Supreme Court out of which arose the most important case of State of Rajasthan 
v. Union of India, A. I. R. 1977 S. C. 1361. The plaintiffs contended that 
the directive contained in the Home Minister's letter to the Chief Minister 
is unconstitutional. The letter discloses the sole ground for the proclamation 
under Art. 356 and that such a proclamation and the dissolution of their 
legislative Assemblies upon the grounds given in the letter is outside the 
scope of Art. 356 of the Constitution. It was also comended that the con- 
dition precedent to the dissolution of the Assemblies is a ratification by both 
Houses of Parliament and so that no dissolution can take place without 
^ascertaining, the wishes of both the Houses of Parliament. The petitioners 
prayed for a permanent injunction restraining the Union of India from giving 
effect to the Home Minister’s directive. On behalf of the Union of India, it 
was contended that the suit under Art. 131 was not maintainable because the 
dispute was of a political character regarding the continuance of a Council 
of Ministers. It was argued that the questions which arose for gauging the 
existence of a “situation” calling for action Under Article 356 are non> 
justifiable. Mere intimation of some facts does not justify a prohibition to 
act in future on other facts. It could not be predicted now what other facts 
may arise in future. 

A seven member constitution Bench of the Supreme Court by an unani- 
mous judgment rejected the petitioner's petition and upheld the Centre’s action 
of dissolving their Assemblies under Art. 356 as constitutionally valid. The 
Court held that the ‘satisfaction’ of President under Art. 356 cannot be 
questioned. {Clause (5) added by the 42ad Amendment] to Art. 356 made 
it Impossible for Courts to question the President’s satisfaction “on any 
ground*’]. The President does not act only on the report of the Governor but 
on otherwise. This means that the satisfaction can be based on material 
other than Governor’s report. The choice between a dissolution and re- 
election or a retention of the same membership of the legislature or the Govern- 
ment for a certain period are matters of political expediency and strategy 
under a democratic system. Under the Indian system, the gist of political 
power through formation of several political parlies is legal. Hence, a mere 
attempt to get more political power for a party is not constitutionally prohibit- 
ed or per se illegal. 

However, the Court did not give a blank cheque to the Government to 
dissolve Assemblies. The Court observed that if the satisfaction is mala fide or 
Is based on wholly extraneous and irrelevant grounds the Court would have 
jurisdiction to examine it, because in that case there would be no satisfaction of 
Const. 54 



426 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OP INDIA 


[Chap. 


the President. (Bhagwati and Gupta, JJ.). The Chief Justice suggested that a 
healthy convention should be developed so that the power under Art. 336 is 
neither exercised capriciously by or arbitrarily not it to be exercised when a 
political situation really calls for. It is not for Courts to formulate and, much 
less, to enforce a convention to regulate the exercise of such an executive power. 
This is a matter which entirely rests with the Executive. 

After the judgment of the Supreme Court the Assemblies in the aforesaid 
Slates were dissolved and elections were held. In the elections, the Janata 
Party secured a thumping majority in these Slates and formed the 
Government. 

Nine Assemblies Dissolution in 1980. 

In 1980. Article 356 was invoked by the Congress (I) Government more 
or less in similar circumstances in which it was invoiced in 1977 by the Janata 
Government at the Centre. The Assemblies of 9 States of Uttar Pradesh, 
Bihar. Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Orissa, Gujarat, Maharasthra and 
Tamil Nadu were dismissed and the President rule was imposed in them on the 
ground that they no longer represent the wishes and aspirations of the electo- 
rate. The facts leading to the dissolution of the nine Assemblies were as 
follows— As stated earlier, in 1977 Lok Sabha elecrions the Janata Party had 
secured a landslide victory and formed the Government at the Centre But due 
to internal dissensions and defections from the party it was reduced to minority 
and the Prime Minister Mr. Morarji tendered the resignation of his Govern- 
ment. The President invited Mr. Charan Siogb, the leader of the alliance to 
form the Government, but before he could face the Parliament he tendered his' 
resignation and advised the President to dissolve the Lok Sabha and order 
fresh elections. The President dissolved the Lok Sabha and ordered fresh 
elections. In the elections the Congress (I) secured a massive majority by 
capturing 351 seats in the House and the Janata Party iould secure only 31 
scats. On the date on which the Congress (1) took office at the Centre, the 
Janata Party was in power in various States. On February 18, 1980 the Centre 
dissolved the Assemblies of the aforesaid nine States and imposed President 
rule in them. The grounds on which the Assemblies were dissolved were 
the same as those advanced by the Janata Government in 1977. The Congress (I) 
contended that after the Lok Sabha elections in December 1979, as in 1977, 
the Slate Governments and Assemblies concerned no longer represent the 
wishes and aspirations of the electorate. The dissolution order, however, 
did not mention any reasons for dissolution presumably due to the fear that 
if reasons were given it might be challenged in the coutt of law. 

Although attempts to distinguish between the two sets of dissolutions may 
not appear to be all convincing because of the political overtures involved 
in it but this does not mean that the two sets of dismissals are exactly similar. 
First, the Assemblies dissolved by the Janata Government were living their 
extended life. Their tenure was extended from 5 years to 6 years by the 
42nd Amendment which was passed when Emergency was in operation. In its 
election manifesto the Janata Party had promised to undo this Amendment. 
The political sovereign (electorate) gave the Janata Party the sanction to 
undo the 42nd Amendment which was enacted by the Legal Sovereign 
(Parliament). Initially, it could not be done because of majority enjoyed by 
the Congress Party in the Upper House. The Janata had therefore to take the 
political decision under Art. 356 to get rid of the Congress ruled ministeries. 
Secondly, the Janata’s case for dismissal was more strongly founded in the 
sense that the party’s victory in the 1977 Lok Sabba election in the concerned 
nine States was much more spectacular than Congress (I)’s election victory in 



CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


428 


[Chap. 


(ule is concerned! but it has not touched this aspect of the Article which was 
much more serious matter than limiting the period of the President s rule. 

Difference between Articles 352 and 356, — Under Article 352 the State 
constitution cannot be suspended. The State Legislature and the State Exeat- 
tive continue to function. The only effect is that Centre gets concurrent 
powers of legislation and administration in State matters. Under Article 356. 
on the other hand, the State Legislature is suspended and dissolved. The 
Executive and Legislative power of the State is exercised by the Centre. Under 
Article 352 the relationship of all the States with the Centre undergoes a 
change, while under Article 356 the relationship of only the State with the 
Centre is affected. 

C. Financial Emergency.— Article 360 provides that if the President is 
satisfied that a situation has arisen whereby the financial stability or credit of 
India or of part of the territory thereof is threatened, he may by a procla- 
mation make a declaration to that effect. The Constitution (38th Amendment) 
Act, 1975, added a new clause (5) which declared that the satisfaction of the 
President shall be final and conclusive and shall not be questioned in any 
court on any ground 

The 44th Amendment Act, 1978.— The Amendment makes two changes in 
Art. 360 of the Constitution. At present clause (2) of Art. 360 incorporates by 
reference the provisions of Cl. (2) of Art. 352. Since Cl. (2) of Art. 352 has 
been amended, it has become necessary to make Cl. (2j of Art. 360 self-contain- 
ed. Therefore, the Amendment substitutes a new clause for Cl. (2) of Art. 
360 which provides that a proclamation issued under Art. 360 (1) (a) may be 
revoked or varied by a subsequent proclamation, (b) shall be laid before each 
House of Parliament, and (c) shall cease to operate at the expiry of two months 
unless before the expiration of that period unless it has been approved by 
resolutions of two Houses of Parliament. But if the Lok Sabha is dissolved 
during this period of two months and resolution is approved by the Rajya 
Sabha, but not by the Lok Sabha, the proclamation shall cease to operate at 
the expiry of 30 days from the date on which the new Lok Sabha sits unless 
before the expiry of 30 days a resolution approving tbe proclamation is passed 
by the Lok Sabha. 

Clause (5) of Art. 360 which was added by the 42nd Amendment has now 
been omitted. 

During the period when such a proclamation is in operation, the executive 
authority of the Union shall extend to the giving direction to any State to 
observe such canons of financial propriety as may be specified in the direction. 
The President is also to give other directions as he may deem necessary and 
adequate for the purpose. 

Any such direction may include a provision for the reduction of salaries 
and allowances of all or any class of persons serving in a State, including the 
Judges of tbe Supreme Court and High Courts. It may also require that all 
Money or Financial Bills are to be reserved for the consideration of the Presi- 
dent after they are passed by the Legislature of the State. 

The duration of a proclamation of financial emergency will be in opera- 
tion for two months and unless approved by the President it shall cease to 
operate at the expiry of two months’ period. 

“The Constitution of India is unique in respect that it contains a 
complete scheme for speedy re-adjustment of the peace-time govern- 



37 

The Amendment of the 
Constitution (Art. 36S) 

Nteessllj of Amending Provision in the Constitution-Provision f or 
amendment of the Constitution is made with a view to overcome tin difficul- 
tly wh ; ch “ay encounter in future in the working of the Constitution No 
generation has a monopoly of wisdom nor has it a right to otace letters on 
future general, ons to mould the machinery of Government acco rd “ g o h* 
requirements. If no provision were made for the amendment of the Constitu- 
tion the people would have recourse to e.tra-nonstitnlional method like 
revolution to change the Constitution. 1 ai fncinoa iiKe 

“It has been the nature Df the amending nrncew r 

which has led political scientists to classify federal Constilutim n, f rS A 
federal Constitution is generally rigid in characte? ,, J g d ' A r 

amendment is unduly complicated. The procedure or am* i he P r . ocedlire . of 
Constitution is very difficult. So is the case with AnsfiTr n Am , erica ° 
Switzerland. It is a common criticism of federal CoasStution . ha? iff, ‘loo 
eonservattve, too difficult to alter and that i, is conseqS,",^ behind 'K 

rigidity! 1 * TheTwem .SJufto h?,".? t^u! which Lfd^ut^hh ” 
growing nation, adapt itself to the chaneine need nnd 5° U d ? row W 
growing people The nature or the 'amending Uoe?ss’ Sged"bv 0 ^ dte 
framers of our Constitution can best be understood hv lS f „ y • 
observation of the late Prime Minister Pt Nehru “WMt* ™ fI ° E the ,( o,, 0 WI °8 
titution to he as solid and permanent", we™ „ J £ ?? ™t? ‘ h ’ 5 C °° S ‘ 
nence in the Constitutions. There should be J^rUta fl/.lt, ill, ?r 

make anything rigid and permanent you stop tb? n“Sn’s V ? 

vital, organic people I n anv P ' «t J g f° wth - of a 1 |V1Q £. 

Constitution so rigid that it cannot be adonted - C0U d ao . t this 

the world is in a 8 period of Slitionfwhat ?e df ?°l di,i ° ns - Wh £ n 

wholly applicable tomorrow.” * roay do ,oda y m ay not be 

But the framers of Indian Constitution were a i,„ * 

that if the Constitution was so flexible it would be a nh.vfv* 16 ,( act 

and caprices of the ruling party. They were therefnl? mg -° f ,hc " hi ™ 
flexibility of the extreme type*. Hence^ ^hey adoiS a mid^ 1011 * a , Void 
neither too rigid to admit necessary amendments nor flefiht* V° UrS j' A, ls 
changes Willis in his book on the Constitutional Law a ab,e 

says, ‘ If no provision for amendment were provided there wniild ^ ' ed St , atcs 
danger of revolution. If the method of amendment were too ^ consta “* 
be the danger of too hasty action all the time. In ehhlr case theS wn.dd U h d 
a danger of the overthrow of our noliti™, the'pnrposlffor 



37] 


the amendment op tub co>srmmoN 


431 


social condition make it necessary to change the fundamental law to 
correspond with such social change.”* 

The machinery of amendment should be like a safety valve, so devised 
as neither to operate the machine with too great facility nor to require, in 
order to set in motion, an accumulation oT force sufficient to explode it . 
The Constitution-makers have, therefore, kept the balance between the dan- 
ger of having a non-ameadablc Constitution and a Constitution which is too 
easily atnendable.- 

“One can, therefore, safely say that the Indian Federation will not 
suffer from the faults of rigidity of legalism. Its distinguishing 
feature is that it is a flexible federation. 8 

For the purpose of amendment the various Articles of the Constitution 
are divided into three categories : 

(1) Amendment by Simple Majority . — Articles that can be amended by 
Parliament by simple majority as that required for passing of any ordinary 
law. The amendments contemplated in Articles 4. 6 and 239 A, can be made 
by simple majority. These articles arc specifically excluded from the purview 
of the procedure prescribed in Article 368, 

(2) Amendment by Special Majority .— Articles of the Constitution which 
can oc amended by a special majority, as laid down in Article 368. All con- 
stitutional amendments other than those referred to above come within this 
category, and must be effected by a majority of the total membership of each 
House of Parliament as well as by a majority of not less than 2/3 of the 
members of that House present and voting. 

(3) By Special Majority and Ralijicatlon by States .— Articles which require 
in addition to the special majority mentioned above, ratification by not less 
than 1/2 of the State Legislatures. The States are given an important voice 
in the amendments or these matters. These are fundamental matters where 
States have important power under the Constitution and any unilateral 
amendment by Parliament may vitally affect .the fundamental basis of the 
system built up by the Constitution. This class of Articles consists of amend- 
ments which seek to make any change in the provisions mentioned in Article 
368. The following provisions require such ratification by the States : 

(1) Election of the President— Articles 34 and 53. 

(2) Extent of the Executive powers of the Union and the States— 
Articles 73 and 162 

(3) Articles dealing with Judiciary, Supreme Court. High Courts in 
the States and Union ferricorics— Articles 124 to 147, 214 to 23 1, 
241. 

(4) Distribution of Legislative powers between the Centre and the 
States— Articles 245—255. 

(5) Any of the Lists of (he VII Schedule. 

(6) Representation of States in Parliament— IV Schedule. 

(7) Article 36S itself. 


Quota! in Ke^airinand v. State of KcraU. A. I. It. 197J S. C. 1*41. 
lfciJ 

Or Amb*4Ui— CAD. VoL IX. p. 1569. 



The Amendment of the 
Constitution (Art. 268) 

Necessity of Amending Prorisioir in Ihe Constitution-Provision for 
amendment of the Constitution is made with a view to overcome the difficul- 
ties which may encounter In future in Ihe working of the Constitution No 
generation has a monopoly of wisdom nor has it a right to place letters on 
future generations to mould the machinery of Government according to their 
requireme nt.. If no provision were made for the amendment of the Constitu- 
tion, the people would have recourse to extra-constitutional method like 
revolution to change the Constitution. 1 

. . .' 7 * has been the nature of the amending process itself in federations 

sasr ■ft? •ssrt Jzrarf C A is 

Switzerland. It is a common criticism offedetal CoMitution that ifis Wo 
conservattve. too dtffieul, to alter and rhat it is UseSy’behin" S 

rigidity. They were unlnu* to SwS’a’d'Sument'whSch cou?d°nro“w“h ” 

wholly applicable tomorrow." y do ,oda y raa y not h® 

.P'JJ framers of Indian Constitution were also aware nf the f a/ .» 
that if the Constitution was so flexible it would be a olav?Mn » \r iki" £ ‘ 
and caprices of the ruling party. They were t f ,he ' vhlms 

flexibility of the extreme tjK Heaee; £ey ad„Sed a midT' ! ° avoid 
neither Mo rigid to admit ntetssary amendment, no? VShlf '' r cours ;- . » “ 
changes. Willis in his book on the Constitutional Law df iJ ir % d S S i rab,e 
says. If no provision for amendment were provided there wonW ^ cd S,atcs 
danger of revolution. If the method of amendment were L “ d ^ constant 
be the danger of too hasty action all the time. In eiihlr rase^.hf r^ 6 W , 5 U 2 d 
a danger of the overthrow of our political institutions IW* ,1* would •* 
providing for the amendment of the Ctotififf U tn ™^ P -? rp0Sc .{ 0r 
gradually to change the Constitution in an orderly fashion as Ihe cha^b 

1 . Kcsavanand v. State of Kerala, A. I. R. 1973 <5 r 

2 . Prof. Wbeare : Federal Government, 196 J ed.. p 20 9 



37) 


THE AMENDMENT OP THE CONSTITUTION 


433 


Amendment or fundamental rights— The question whether fundamental 
rights can be amended under Article 368 came for consideration of the Supreme 
Court in Shankarl Prasad v. Union of India.'' In that case the validity of the 
Constitution (First Amendment) Act. 1951, which inserted inter alia Articles 
31-A and 31-B of the Constitution was challenged. The amendment was 
fbaJtaijed on the ground that it purported to take away or abridge the 
rights conferred by Part III which fell within the prohibition of 
Article 13 (2) and hence was void. It was argued that the "State" in Article 
12 includes Parliament and the word "law” in Article 13 (2), therefore, must 
include a constitutional amendment. 

The Supreme Court, however, rejected the above argument and held 
thatthe power to amend the Constitution including the fundamental rights 
was contained in Article 368, and that the word ‘law’ in Article 13 (8) includes 
only an ordinary law made in exercise of the Legislative power and does 
not include a constitutional amendment which is made in exercise of consti- 
tuent power. Therefore, s constitutional amendment will be valid even if it 
abridges or takes away any of the fundamental rights. 

In Sajjan Singh v. State of Rajasthan ,* the validity of the Seventeenth 
Amendmennt of the Constitution was in question. This amendment amended 
Article 31-A by inserting one more proviso to it. Anew sub-clause (a) was 
substituted for the old sub-clause (a) of clause (2) of Article 31 retrospectively. 
By this amendment 44 Acts were added in the Ninth Schedule. The petitioners 
contended that the power vested in the High Court, under Atticlc 226 was 
likely to be affected by the 1 7«h Amendment, therefore it was necessary 
that the special procedure laid down in proviso to Article 368 should have 
been followed. The impugned Act was said to be unconstitutional because 
it was not enacted according to the procedure laid down in Article 363. In 
this case the Supreme Court approved the majority judgment given tn Shan- 
kari Prasad's cjsc. The majority in Sajjan Singh’s case held that the expression 
"amcDdment of the Constitution" means amendment of all the provisions 
of the Constitution. Gajendragadkar, C. J. said that if the Constitution- 
makers intended to exclude the Fundamental Rights from (he scope of the 
amending power, they would have made a clear provision in that behalf. 

In Gotak A'urh v. Slate of Punjab f the validity of the Constitution (17lh 
Amendment) Act, 1964, which Included In the Ninth Schedule, among other 
Acts, the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953, and the Mysore Land 
Reforms Act, 1962, as amended by Act of 1965. The Supreme Court by a 
majority of 6 to 5 prospectively overruled its earlier decision in ShanKwi Pra- 
sad’s and Sajjan Singh's cases and held that Parliament had no power, from 
the dale of this decision, to amend Part III of the Constitution so as to take 
away or abridge ihe fundamental rights ensured therein. This meaot that 
though Parliament has the right to amend the proshions of th: Constitu- 
tion it cannot be amended so as to take a«vay or abridge the fuaJsmeatsl 
rights Chief Justice Subha Rao supported his judgment on the following 
reasonings : 

(1) The Chief Justice rejected the argument that the power to amend tbs 
Constitution is a soseteign power and the said power is supreme to the legit- 

I. A I.R. J«J) S C.4JJ*lp.4JS. 

1. A. I R. 1*«5 S. C. *45. 

J A.I.R. 1W7S.C. tfrtJ. 

Cons. 55 



432 


CONSJlTtmoNAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Chap. 


Proceedare Tor Amendment— \ Bill to amend the Constitution may be 
introduced in either House of Parliament. It must be passed by each House 
by a majority of the total membership to that House and by a majority of not 
less than 2/3 of the members of that House present and voting. When a Bill is 
passed by both Houses it-shall be presented to the President for his assent, 
who shall give his assent to the Bill and thereupon the Constitution shall stand 
amended. 1 But a Bill which seeks to amend the provisions mentioned in 
Article 368 requires in addition to the special majority mentioned above the 
ratification by the 1/2 of the States. 

Article 368, however, does not constitute the complete Code of unconsti- 
tutional amendment and that the process of amending the Constitution is the 
legislative process governed by the rules of that process. 

Thus it is clear that most of the provisions of the Constitution can be 
amended by an ordinary legislative process. Only a few provisions which 
deal with the ‘federal principle' require a special majority plus ratification by 
the States. The procedure to amend these provisions is in conformity with the 
federal principle. The procedure to amend the Constitution is, however, not 
so difficult as in America or Australia. The difficult procedure of referendum 
followed in Australia and Switzerland or constitutional conventions followed 
in America, have not been adopted in Indian Constitution. Most of the pro- 
visions of the Indian Constitution can be amended by the special majority. 
Though different from the ordinary Legislative process, the special majority 
rule does not result in a very rigid method of amendment as is clear from 
the fact that the Constitution has bean amended as many as 4S times within 
the period of 20 years. Even the procedure to amend the Constitution with 
the consent of States, though more rigid than the special majority rule, is 
not so difficult as the American or Australian procedure to amend the 
Constitution. 

In Australia the Constitution can be amended in the following manner : 

1. Amendment must be proposed by an absolute majority of both 
Houses. 

2. Within 6 months this must be submitted to the electors. 

3. Must be approved by a majority of the electors in a majority of 
the States. 

In America, the constitutional amendments can be proposed in either 
of two ways— (l) by 2/3 of the votes of both Houses of Congress, or (2) by a 
Convention called on the application of the Legislatures of 2/3 of the States. 
An Amendment proposed in either of the above two ways can be ratified in 
either of two ways : — 

1. by the Legislatures or 3/4 of the States, or 

2. by Conventions in 3/4 of the States. 

From the above, it is clear that the procedure in Australia and the 
United States is much more difficult than that of the Indian Constitution. 

Thus, it may be said that the Indian Constitutio n-makers have sought to 
find a via media, between the two extremes— extreme flexibility and extreme 
rigidity, as this, it is hoped, wilt duly meet the needs of a growing society. 

I- The Constitution (24th Amendment) Act, 1971. 



434 


CONSflTUltONAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Chap. 


latWe powet and that it does not permit any implied limitations and that 
amendments made in exercise of that power invotve political questions and 
that therefore they are outside of judicial review. 


(2) The power of Parliament to amend the Coast itution is derived from 
Articles 245. 246 and 248 of the Constitution and not from Article 368. which 
only deals with procedure. Amendment is a legislative process. 

(3) An amendment is a 'law* within the meaning of Article 13 (2) and, 
therefore, if it takes or abridges the fundamental rights it is void. The word 
‘law* in Article 13 (2) includes every kind of law, statutory as well as consti- 
tutional law and, hence a constitutional amendment which contravenes 
Article 13 (2) will be void. 


The Chief Justice said the fundamental rights are assigned transcendental 
place under our Constitution and therefore they are kept beyond the reach of 
Parliament. s 

The majority accordingly held that the Constitution (17th Amendment) 
Act. 1964, is void inasmuch as it takes away or abridges the fundamental 
rights under Article 13 (2) of the Constitution. The Chief Justice applied the 
doctrine of Prospective Overruling and held that this decision will have only 
prospective operation and therefore, the 1st, 4th and 17th Amendments will 
continue to be valid. 


The majority, however, did not express any Goal opinion on the question 
whether the word ‘amendment’ in Article 368 includes the power to destroy 
the basic structure of the Constitution or abrogation of the Constitution or its 
complete rewriting. 

The minority view of five out of eleven Judges was that the word ’law’ in 
Article 13 (2) refers to only ordinary law and not a constitutional amend- 
ment and hence Shankorl Prasad’s and Sajjan Singh's cases were rightly decid- 
ed. According to them, Article 368 dealt with not only the procedure of 
amending the Constitution but also contained the power to amend the 
Constitution. 


Hidayatullah and ATudholkar, JJ., however, by a separate judgment 
doubted the correctness of the majority view, as to whether fundamental rights 
were not ‘really fundamental aod should be amended under Aricle 368. 
Mudholkar, J., posed a further question, whether making a change in a basic 
feature of the Constitution can be regarded merely an amendment or would 
it, in effect, be rewriting a part of the Constitution ; and if the latter would, 
it be within the purview of Article 368. 

24th Amendment Act, 1971.— In order to remove difficulties created by 
the decision of Supreme Court in Golak Nath's case Parliament enacted the 
Constitution (24th Amendment) Act, 1971. 


Section 2 of the Amendment Act added clause (4) to Article 13 of the 
Constitution providing that “nothing in this Article shall apply to any amend- 
ment of this Constitution made under Article 368". Section 3 (a) of the Amend- 
ing Act substitutes a new marginal heading to Article 368 in place of the old. 
The old heading was “procedure for amendment of the Constitution”. The 
new heading is “Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and pro- 
/n * Im' '• o ect, ,°- n , 3 of the Amsndrae nt Act inserts a new sub-section 
ronsth.,?ion C l wh . ,ch pr ? vides ‘ hat ‘‘Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution, Parliament may, in exercise of its constituent power amend by 



37 ] 


TUB AMENDMENT OP THE OONSrifUTlON 


435 


way of addition, variation or repeal any provision of this Constitution in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in this Article". Section 3 (c) of the 
Amending Act substitutes the words "it shall be presented to the President 
who- shall give his assent to the Bill and thereupon" for the words “it shall 
be presented to the President for his assent and upon such assent being given 
to the Bill.” Thus section 3 (c) makes it obligatory for the President to give 
his assent to the Amendment Bill. Section 3(d) adds a new clause (3) to 
Article 368 which provides th3t “nothing in Article 13 shall apply to any 
amendment made under this Article”. 

Thus the 24th Amendment not only restored the amending power of 
the Parliament but also extended the scope of the amending power by adding 
the words "to amend by way of the addition or variation or repeal any 
provision of this Constitution jn accordance with the procedure laid down 
in this Article”. 

Kesavanaod Bbarti’s Ruling and Theory of Basle Stmctnre 

The validity of the Constitution (24th Amendment) Act, 1971 was, inter 
alia challenged in Kesavanand v. State of Kerah, x popularly kQown as the 
Fundamental Rights case : 

The question involved was, what Is the extent of the amending power 
conferred by Article 368 of the Constitution ? On behalf of the Union of India, 
it was claimed that amending power is unlimited. Short of repeal of the 
Constitution, any change may be effected. Tbe Counsel for the petitioner, 
on the other hand, contended that the amending power is wide but not unlimit- 
ed. Under Article 368, Parliament cannot destroy the 'basic features’ of the 
Constitution. 

A Special Bench of 13 judges W3S constituted to hear the case. Out of 
the 13 judges 11 judges delivered separate judgments. 

The Court by majority overruled the Golak Nath’s case, which denied 
Parliament the power to amend fundamental rights of citizens. The majority 
held that Article 368, even before the 24th Amendment, contained the power 
as well as the procedure of amendment. Tbe 24th Amendment merely made 
explicit what was implicit in the unamended Article 36S-A. The 24th Amend- 
ment does not enlarge the amending power of the Parliament. The 24th 
Amendment is declaratory in nature, ft only declares the true legal position as 
it was before that amendment. Hence it is valid. 

As regards the scope of amending power contained in Article 368, six 
judges (Sikii, C. J., Shelat, Grover, Hegde, Reddy and Mukherjea, JJ.) held 
that there was inherent or implied limitations on the amending ' power of 
Parliament and Article 36S did not confer power to amend tbe Constitution 
so as to damage or destroy the esseatsal elements or basic features of the 
Constitution. Khanna, J., held that though there was no implied limitation 
on the amending power but the power to amend did not include the power to 
abrogate the Constitution. The word “amendment”, he said, postulates that 
tbe old Constitution must survive without loss of identity and it must be retain- 
ed though in the amended form and, therefore, the power does not include the 
power to destroy or abrogate the basic structure or framework of the Consti- 
tution. The remaining six judges (A. N. Ray, Chaadrachud, Mathew, Beg, 
Dwivedi and Palekar, JJ.) held that there were no limitations, express or 
implied on the amending power. Thus the Court by majority of 7 to 6 held 


l. A. I. R. 1973 S. C. 1461. 


436 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


that the Parliament has wide powers of amending the Constitution and extends 
to all the Articles, but the amending power is not unlimited and does not 
include the power to destroy or abrogate the 'basic features’ or ’framework or 
the Constitution. There are implied limitations on the power of amendment 
under Article 368. Within these limits, Parliament can amend every Article 
of the Constitution. Whether there are implied limitations on the amending 
power or not would depend upon the interpretation of the word ‘amendment . 

Delivering the leading majority judgment the Chief Justice said. “In the 
Constitution the word ‘amendment’ or ‘amend’ has been used in various places 
to mean different things. In some articles, the word ‘amendment* in the ^con- 
text, has a wide meaning and in another context it has a narrow meaning/ In 
view of the great variation of the phrases used all through the Constitution it 
follows that the word “amendment” must derive its colour from Article 36$ 
and the rest of the provisions of the Constitution. Reading the Preamble, the 
fundamental importance of the freedom of the individual, its inalienability, 
and the importance of the economic, social and political justice mentioned in 
the Preamble, the importance of directive principles, the non-inclusion in 
Article 368 of provisions like Articles 52, 53 and various other provisions, ao 
irresistible conclusion emerges that it was not the intention to use the word 
“amendment” in the widest sense. It was the common understanding that the 
fundamental rights would remain in substance as they are and they would not 
be amended out of existence. It stems also to have been a common under- 
standing that the fundamental features of the Constitution, namely, secularism, 
democracy and the freedom of the individual would always subsist in the 
welfare State. In view of the above reasons, a necessary implication arises on 
the power of Parliament that the expression ‘amendment of this Constitution 
has consequently a limited meaning in our Constitution and not the meaning 
suggested by the Attorney-General. The expression “amendment of this Cons- 
titution” in Article 368 means any addition or change in any of the provisions 
of the Constitution within the broad contours of the Preamble and the Consti- 
tution to carry out the objectives in the Preamble and the Directive Principles 
applied to fundamental rights, it would mean that while fundamental rights, 
cannot be abrogated reasonable abridgements of fundamental rights can be 
effected in the public interest, “If this meaning is given”, the Chief Justice said, 
“it would enable Parliament to adjust fundamental rights in order to secure 
what the Directive Principles direct to be accomplished, while maintaining the 
freedom and dignity of every citizen. Oo behalf of the Union and the States, 
it was urged that the conceptions of basic elements and fundamental features 
are illusive conceptions and therefore it would be very unsatisfactory test for 
the Parliament to comprehend and follow. The Chief Justice said, that the 
concept of amendment within the contours of the Preamble and of Constitution 
cannot be said to be a vague and unsatisfactory idea which Parliamentarians 
and the public would not be able to understand. He said that the argument 
that because something cannot be cut and dried or nicely weighed or measured 
and therefore does not exist is fallacious. There are many concepts of law 
Wntcn are not capable ol exact definition, "hut it docs not mean that it does not 
exist. It was also argued that every provision of the Constitution is essential 
otherwise it would not have been put in the Constitution. The Chief Justice’ 
further said, “But this does not place every provision or the Constitution in the 
same position. The true position is that every provision of the Constitution can 
be amended provided in the result, the basic foundation and structure of the 
Constitution remains the same. 

What is basic structure. 

What then are the essentials of the basic structure of the Constitution ? 



438 


coNsnumoNAt. law of india 


[Chap. 


in Ridge v. Baldvin in Kesavanand Bharti's 1 case, Sikri, C. J. said, "Id modern 
times opinions have sometimes been expressed that natural justice is so vague 
as to be practically meaningless. B it / would regard these as tainted by the 
per eneial fallacy that became something cannot be cut and dried or nicely weighed 
or measured therefore it dots not exist. The idea of negligence is equally 
insusceptible of exact definition, but what a reasonable man would regard as 
fair procedure in particular circumstances and what he would regard as 
uegUger.ee in particular circumstances are equally capable of serving as tests in 
law, and natural justice as it has been interpreted in the courts is much more 
defined than that." 

If the historical background, the Preamble, the entire scheme of the 
Constitution and the relevant provisions thereof including Art. 368 are kept In 
mind then there can be no difficulty in determining what are the basic elements 
of the basic structure of the Constitution. These words apply with greater 
force to the doctrine of the basic structure, because, the federal and democratic 
structure of our Constitution, the separation of powers, the secular character of 
our State are very much more definite than either negligence or natural 
justice 4 

In 1975 the Attorney-General moved an application in the Supreme Court 
for reconsidreation of the theory of basic structure laid down in Kesvananda’s 
case. During the course of hearing the review petition the judges asked the 
Attorney-General whether the doctrine of the basic structure had prevented the 
Government in enacting Jaws for implementing socio-economic measures 7 He 
answered that it has not done so. Since no case was made out by the 
Attorney-General for the reconsideration of the Kesvananda's case the Bench 
was dissolved. 

Khanna. J., concurred with the majority decision but delivered a separate 
judgment. He said : 

“The amendment of the Constitution necessarily contemplates that the 
Constitution has not to be abrogated. (Indeed, this much has been 
conceded by -the Attorney-General). The word ‘amendment' postu- 
lates that the old Constitution survives without loss of its identity 
despite the change and continues even though it has been subjected 
to alterations. As a result of the amendment, the old Constitution 
cannot be destroyed, and done away with ; it is retained though in 
the amended form The words ‘amendment of the Constitution’ 
with all their wide sweep and amplitude cannot have the effect of 
destroying and abrogating the basic structure or framework of the 
Constitution. It would not be competent under the garb of amend- 
ment, for instance, to change the democratic Government into 
dictatorship of hereditary monarchy nor it would be permissible to 
abolish the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha. The secular character 
of the State according to which the State shall not discriminate 
against any citizen on the ground of religion only cannot likewise 
be done away with. Provision regarding the amendment of the 
Constitution does not furnish a pretence for subverting the structure 
of the Constitution nor can Article 368 be so construed as to 
embody the dearth with of the Constitution or provide sanction for 
what may perhaps be called its lawful harakiri. Such subversion 

1. 1964 A C. 401. 

% H. M. Sccrvai : Constitutional Law of India, IJnd Ed., Vol. II, p, J568. 



440 coKsimmotiM- law of ihoia (Chap. 

theory of basic structure and struck down Cl. (4) of Article 329-A, which was 
inserted by the Constitution (39th Amendment) Act, 1975, as unconstitutional 
and violative of Parliament’s power to amend Constitution as it destroys the 
tasic features of the Constitution. The amendment was made to validate 
election of the Prime Minister which was declared void by the Allahabad High 
Court. Khanna, J., struck down other clause on the ground that it violated 
the free and fair elections which is an essential postulate of democracy which 
in turn is a part of the basic structure of the Constitution, Chandrachud, J., 
struck down Cls. (4) and (5) as unconstitutional on the ground that they are 
outright negation of the right of equality conferred by Art. 14 a right which 
is a basic postulate of our Constitution. He held that these provisions are 
arbitrary and are calculated to damage or destroy the Rule of law. Thus the 
Supreme Court has added the following features as basic features of the Consti- 
tution to the list of basic feature laid down in the Kesavanand Bharti'S case : 

1. Rule of law. 

2. Equality before law. 

3. Free and Fair Election, which is a basic postulate of Democracy. 

42nd Amendment and Article 368. 

The Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976, has added two new clauses, 
Clauses (4) and (5) to Article 368 of the Constitution. The new clause (4) 
provides that ‘no constitutional amendment (including the provision of Part 
III) or purporting to have been made under Art. 363 whether before or after 
the commencement of the Constitution (42od Amendment) Act, 1976 shall 
be called in any court on any ground. Clause (5) removes any doubts about 
the scope of the amending power. It declares that there shall be no limitation 
whatever on the constituent power of Parliament to amend by way of addition, 
variation or repeal of the provisions of the Constitution under this Article. 
Thus by inserting clause (5) it makes it clear that even the basic feature” of 
tne Constitution can be amended. 

This amendment would, according to Mr. Swaran Singh, the Chairman 
Congress Committee on Constitutional Amendments put an end to any con- 
troversy as to which is supreme. Parliament or the Supreme Court. Clause 
(4) asserts the supremacy of Parliament. Parliament represents the will of 
the people and if people desire to amend the Constitution through Parliament 
there can be no limitation whatever on the exercise of this power. 

This amendment removes the limitation, imposed on the amending power 
of Parliament by the ruling of the Supreme Court in Kesavanand Bharfi's case. 
' In that case, the Court has held that, while Parliament has power to amend 
any pan of the Constitution’, but power cannot be exercised so as to alter or 
destroy the ‘basic structure of the Constitution. It was said that the theory of 
‘basic structure’ as invented by the Supreme Court is vague and will create diffi- 
culities. The amendment seeks to rectify this situation. It was however not 
pointed out dearly as to what were Ibe difficulties faced by Patlismeat dae 
to the basic structure theory. 

A question may be asked here. Can it be saul that an amendment made 
by Parliament is an amendment made by the people ? The (42nd Amendment) 
was intended to achieve this object. It was argued that the amending body 

’■ F.l»« Safeguard aad the Habeas Cor,., Case. A 



IHB AMENDMENT OF TllB (JONSTiTUTIOfi 


441 


ill 


under Article 368 has the full constituent power. In other words, the Parlia- 
ment acts in the same capacity as the Constituent Asssembly when exercising 
the power of amendment under Art. 368. 


It is, however, submitted that this proposition is totally wrong : 

First, an amendment made by Parliament can not be said to be an 
amendment made by the people. There is a distinction between the power of the 
people to amend a Constitution and the power of the legislature to amend 
it. It is true that Parliament represents the will of the people. But it is not 
equally true that whatever Parliament does is usually approved by the people. 
The Lok Sabha election held in 1977 is a good example to show that the 
representative of the people in Parliament do not always reflect the people’s will. 
Whatever was done during the emergency was done in the name of the people. 
But from the slection result it was clear that they had rejected all what had been 
done in their name by their representatives. Therefore it is not possible to 
derive support for an unfettered amending power from the theory that the 
representatives of the people always reflect the people’s will. The theory of 
' basic structure propounded by the Supreme Court in the Fundamental right's 
core is correct and will act as a safety-valve against arbitrary use ot the 
amending power. In Australia, out of 30 amendments proposed by the 
absolute majority of Australian Parliament only four were accepted and 26 were 
rejected by the people. This illustration makes it clear that Parliament does 
not always represent tbe will of the people. 

Secondly, the assertion of Parliamentary supremacy is based on wrong 
notions. The supremacy of Parliament is the main characteristics of the British 
Constitution. The Parliamentary supremacy means that Parliament has 
unlimited law-making power. It includes both the constituent power and 
ordinary law-making powers. Parliament can change the Constitution by 
passing an ordinary law. It means that there is no distinction in England 
between Constitutional law and ordinary law. Secondly, no law passed by 
Parliament can be declared unconstitutional by the courts. In India, Parlia- 
ment is not supreme but the Constitution is supreme. Parliament is a creature 
of the Constitution and derives its powers from tbe provisions of the Consti- 
tution including the power to amend the Constitution under Art. 368. Laws 
passed by Parliament can be declared ultra vires the Constitution. There is a 
distinction between the constituent power and the ordinary law-making power. 
The Amending power under Article 368, therefore, cannot be exercised in such 
a way so as to subsert or abrogate the Constitution. 


Constitutional Amendments can still be challenged. 

There is an anomaly in clause II) of Art. 368 and the new clauses (41 3n j 
(5) added to Article 368 by the 42nd Amendment Act. 1976. Clause (j) 
requires the procedure to be complied with in passing an amendment Q f , he 
Constitution. Where the new clauses (4) and (5) i declare that the amendment 
cannot be challenged on "any ground whatever .- This means that even ;r 
the amendment Act is not passed in accordance with tbe ^procedure fctf d d 
in Article 36S. its validity cannot be challenged. This cannot be correct 
position and definitely the framers never intended that the constituent 
can be exercised without following the procedure laid down 'hAtti-i/ 0 ,," 
The Courts are bound to give effect to clause (1) which has not bce a ,£ 
effective expressly by clauses (4) and (5). Consequently ’the validity 
lending Act can be challenged on the ground that the procedure as t 4 -j / th ; 
in Article 36S 0) cannot be followed ; 

Const 56 



442 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


Secondly, the amendment can be challenged on substantive ground also. 
Ia Kesavananda's case the Supreme Court had held that Parliament cannot 
alter the “basic stucture” of the Constitution in exercise of its amending power 
under Article 368 of the Constitution. The amendment is intended to bar 
judicial review of constitutional amendments. But so long as the rulings in 
Kesavanand's case stands constitutional amendments can still be challenged 
on the ground that they affect some of the ‘basic features’ of the Consti- 
tution. 1 

Recently, in Minerva Mills v. Union of India , 2 (uoreported) the Supreme 
Court by 4 to 1 majority (Mr. Chandracbud, C. J. and Gupta, Untawalia, and 
Kailasam, 33. for majority and Bhagwati, I. dissenting] held that section 
55 of the 42nd Amendment 1976 which inserted sub-sections (4) and (5) in Art. 
368 is beyond the amending power of the Parliament and is void since it 
removes all limitations on the power of Parliament to amend the Constitution 
and conferring unlimited amending power upon Parliament so as to damage or 
destroy its basic or essential features or its basic structure. 

Applying the principles laid down in Kesavanaflda Bharti’s decision the 
Supreme Court struck down sub-clauses (4) and (5) of Art. 368 of the Constitu- 
tion which conferred on Parliament unlimited amending power and declared that 
the Parliament cannot have unlimited power to amend the Constitution. 

The order of the Supreme Court, thus declares in categorical terms that 
tbe Constitution — not Parliament— is supreme in India. This is in accordance 
with the intention of the framers who adopted a written Constitution for the 
country. Under the written Constitution there is a clear distinction between 
the ordinary legislative power and the constituent power (amending power) 
of Parliament. Parliament cannot have unlimited amending power so as to 
damage or destroy the Constitution to which it owes its existence and also 
derives its power. Tbe Parliament elected for a fixed period or five years is 
meant for certain specific purposes and can not be vested with unlimited 
amending power. The decision ol the court is to be welcomed. It 'has put 
at rest the long drawn controversy between the Courts and the Executive. 
The Government should not take the order of the court as a challenge against it 
but in tbe spirit of the compromise and co-operation between the two organs 
of the Government. 


t. See D. D. Base : Constitutional Law of India, 1977 Edition, p. 438 
2. Feller reasons for decision will be riven later on. 



38 

Constitutional Amendments 
( 1950 - 1978 ) 

First Amendment, 1951 

, This Amendment was amde to remove difficulties created by several 
decisions of the Supreme Court, viz. Ramesh Thappar v. State of Madras, 1 Srij 
Bhushan v. State of Delhi * and Molt Lai v. State of Uttar Pradesh .» 

The Amendment added three more grounds of restrictions to Art. 19(2), 
viz. ‘public order’ , ‘friendly relation with foregin States’ and incitement to an 
offence’. In Ramesh Thappar and Brij Bhushan cases the Supreme Court 
held that freedom of speech and expression could not be curtailed merely for 
maintaining ‘public order’ and ‘public safety’ unless the security of State is 
also threatened. It added the word ‘reasonable’ before the word ‘restriction’ 
and thus made restrictions a justiciable issue. The amendment added an 
explanatory clause to Art- 19 (6) which made it clear that State Trading and 
Nationalization of any trade or business by the State will not be invalid on the 
ground that it infringes right to trade and commerce guaranteed in Art. 19 (1) 
(g) [Afoti Lai's case]. The Amendment added two new Art. 31-A and 3f>B 
to validate certain Land Reforms Laws (Zamindari Abolition Law). The 
newly added Ninth Schedule made Acts named therein beyond the challenge of 
Courts for infringement of fundamental rights guaranteed in Arts. 14, 19 
and 31. 

A new clause (4) was added to Art. 15 which empowers the State to make 
special provisions for advancement of the socially and educationally backward 
classes of citizens. It was necessitated due to the decision of the Supreme Court 
in Champakam Dorairajan v. State of Madras. 

The amendment also amended Arts. 85, 87, 174, 176, 341, 341 and 376. 
Second Amendment, 1952. 

It amend Art. 81 (1) (b) which dealt with representation of States in 
Parliament. It provided that one member of the House could represent even 
more than 7,50,000 persons thus made it possible to maintain the total stengtb 
of Lok Sabha constant at 500 which would have become impossible under the 
original Article. 

Third Amendment, 1954. 

This Amendment amended Entry 33 of the Concurrent List. Originally 
Entry 33 empowered the Centre to control the products of the controlled 
industry only. The control of essential commodities was not within the 
exclusive jurisdiction of the Centre. It fell under the State sphere under Entry 
27, List II. This position was found to be unsatifactory. The food situation 
in the country was difficult. Essential supplies were in short supply. t d 
remove this difficulty this amendment widened, the scope of Entry 33, List III 
empowering Parliament to control the production, supply and distribution of 
all kinds of commodities. 

I. A. I. R. 1950 S- C. 124. 



444 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW Of INDIA 


| Chap. 


Fourth A mend men!, 1955. 

This Amendment was passed to remove the difficulties created by the 
Supreme Court's decision in Bela Barter jee's cote.* The Court had insisted for 
payment of compensation in every case of compulsory deprivation of property 
by the State, ft was held that clause (I) and clause (2) of Article 31 deal with 
the same subject, that is, deprivation of private property. In Bela Bantrjee s 
case the Court had held that the word 'compensation’ meant ‘just compensa- 
tion’ i. e. a just equivalent of ‘what the owner had been deprived oC. The 
Amendment modified Art. 31(2). It made clear that clauses (I) and (2) deal 
with different things, < c. deprivation and compulsory acquisition. The new 
Art. 31 (2) (A) made it clear that the compensation was only payable in the 
case of compulsory acquisition, /, e. where the State acquires the ownership in 
property taken. The adequacy of compensation was also made non -justiciable. 
The amendment broadened the scope of Art. 31-A and included more statutes 
in the Ninth Schedule. The Amendment also amended Art. 305 and em- 
powered the State to nationalise any trade. 

Fifth Amendment, 1955. 

It has amended Art. 3 of the Constitution, Article 3 provided for a Bill 
for reorganisation of States to be referred to the States for expression of their 
views. Originally, it did not prescribe a time limit for expression of views by 
the States. It was, therefore, feared that the Slates could forestall the passage 
State Reorganisation Act by not expressing their views for any length of time. 
The amended Article now provides a time limit within which the States have to 
express their views If they do not express tbeir views witbiD the specified time 
the Bill may be passed by Parliament. 

Sixth Amendment, 1956. 

The amendment effected changes in Entry 92, List I and Entry 55, List II. 
Originally, the general power of State to impose sales-tax or purchase-tax under 
Entry 54 included also to impose sales-tax on inter-State sale or purchase. In 
State of Bombay v. United Motors {India) Limited ,» the Supreme Court had held 
that the States have power to tax inter-State sales. The unrestricted power of 
States to tax inter-State sales resulted in double and multiple taxation of such 
sale altering trend, and economy of the Union. The Amendment made the 
subject-matter of taxation of inter-State sale a Union subject by introducing 
new Entry 92A in List I and making the Entry 54 of List II subject to Entry 
92- A of List I. Parliament was empowered to define what is a sale ‘outside’ a 
State or in the course of import and export. [Art. 286(2)1. It added clause 
(3) to Art. 286 which restricts State's power to tax important goods or com- 
modities in the inter-State trade. 


Seventh Amendment, 1956. 

It was passed after the enactment of the State’s Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
In order to implement the State’s Reorganisation Plan it amended Arts. I First 
Schedule. Fourth Schedule, Arts. 80. 81, 82. 153, 158. 170, 171 and Arts. 239 
to 241. Amended Art. t, abolished the existing classification of States into 
three categories, e. g. Part A. Part B and Part C, Parts A and B were treated 
on equal footing and Part C were designated as Union territories, Conse- 
quential changes were brought about in Arts. 80,81, 82,170, 17) and Arts. 
239 to 24 1. To adjust constituencies and allocation of seats in the Parliament 
First and Fourth Schedules were amended. 


1. A. I, R. 1954 S. C. 170. 
7, A. t. R. 1953 s. C. 242, 



38) 


CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS 


445 


Article 131 was amended so as'to adjust the original jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court because of the abolition of Part B States. 

In case of High Courts .the following changes were made: (1) Proviso to 
Art. 216 fixing the maximum strenth of judges was omitted , (2) Art. 220 (new 
Article) permitted a retired permanent judge of the High Court to practise 
in the Suoreme Court : (3) (Art. 224 provided for appointment of additional 
‘an ^ Courts and fixed age of their retirement at 60 
Years ; (4) Arts. 230 and 231 were substituted for Arts. 230,231, 232, Article 

230 expanded the jurisdiction of High Courts to Union territories. Article 

231 provided for establishment of a common High Court for two or more 

States. . _ 

It added the following new Articles-Art. 258A which empowered States 
toentraltS functions to Centre. Article 298 extended the executive power of 
the Union and the States to carry on any trade or business and the acquisition 
of holding and disposal of property and making of contracts for any pnrpose- 
Article 090 authorised payment of money out of the Consolidated Fund of the 
Stales of Kerala and Madras 10 a religions fund or mainlennace of Hindu tern- 
pies and shrines. „ , . ... 

The new Arts. 350A and 350B were added to safeguard interest of itn- 
guistic minorities. 

Article 371 provided for Regional Committees for Andhra Pradesh. 

In the Seventh Schedule, Entry 42 was substituted for Entry 33 of List I 
and Entry 36 of List II in order to remove power of Government for acquisition 
and requisition of property for Government purposes. 

Eighth Amendment, 1960. _ . 

The Amendment extended the period of reservation of seats in the Legis- 
latures for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Anglo-Indians from 10 
vears to 20 years. For this purpose, it substituted the word “twenty years for 
the words "ten years" in Art. 334 of the Constitution. 

Ninth Amendment, 1960. _ 

The Amendment was passed in the light of the opinion of dhe Supreme 
Court in Berubari's case (A. I. R. I960 S. C. 845). It redeFmedtheboundary 
of State of West Bengal, and made necessary changes in the First Schedule to 
cede the Indian territory of Berubari to Pakistan as prov.ded in the Indo- 
Pakiston Agreement. 

Tenth Amendment, 1961. . . , _ . , _ , __ „ 4 

The Amendment added two new territories of Dadra and Nagar Have h to 
the List of Union territories, in the First Schedule. It added a new Article 
239-A to provide for the creation of the Legislatures, Councilor Ministers m 
certain Union territories. 

Eleventh Amendment, 1961. . 

It added a new clause 4 to Art. 71 of the Constitution which makes clwr 
the election of the President or Vice-President cannot be challenged on the 
h vn ,nVl ihat anv vacancy existed in the electoral college as mentioned in Arts, 
ground that any ' * A , R 1957 S . c . 694. it was contended that the 

o 4 a |4S;i election should be postponed till the election io certain consti- 
tuncies ontunjab and Himachal Pradesh were not held ns without »h,dt ,h e 
electoral college would be incomplete. 

Twr-Ith Amendment, 1962- 

Bv this Amendment the territories or Goa. Daman and Dm were mdoded 
, s a U nion territory in the Fits! Schedule. 



CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


(Chap. 


446 


Thirteenth Amendment, 1962. 

The Amendment was passed following to the agreement between the 
Government oflndia and the leaders of the Naga Peoples Convention for the 
establishment of the separate Slate of Nagaland. It added a new Art. 37I-A, 
which made certain special provisions for the governance of the State of Naga- 
land. It was purely a temporary provision till the formal announcement of the 
separate State of Nagaland. 

Fourteenth Amendment, 1962. 

The Amendment added the territory of Pondicherry, a French establish- 
ment as a Uoiou territory in the First Schedule. It also added a new Art. 239-A 
which provided for the creation of the Legislatures and Council of Ministers in 
some of the Union territories. 

Fifteenth Amendment, 1963., 

U raised the retirement age of the High Court Judges from 60 years to 62 
years by amending Arts. 271 and 124 and laid down the procedure for 
determination of their age. The Amendment was necessitated due to a long 
standing litigation in Milter’s case C. W. N. 211. Article 222 modified so as to 
provide compensatory allowance, in addition to their salary, to the High Court 
Judges when they are transferred from one Court to the other Court. A new 
Article 224-A was added which provided foT retired judges of the High Courts 
to act as judges of the same Court. It added a new clause (IA) to Art. 226 to 
enable High Courts to issue writs to any person or authority even outside Us 
territorial jurisdiction. The Amendment was necessitated by the Supreme 
Court’s decision ia Election Commission v. Venkata Rao, A. I. R. 1953 S. C. 210. 
Before the Amendment, only the Punjab High Court could issue writs against 
any department of the Government of India located at New Delhi. Article 128 
was amended to enable a retired judge of the High Courts to act as ad hoc 
judges of Ihe Supreme Court. It added the words ’continental shelf’ to Art. 
297. 

The Amendment modified Art. 311 (2) and limited the scope of second 
opportunity given to a civil servant In disciplinary matters after the Inquiry 
was over and the authority reached a conclusion to impose the punishment of 
dismissal and reduction in rank ou him. 

Sixteenth Amendment, 1963. 

R amended clauses (2), (3) and (4) of Article 19 to enable the State to impose 
reasonable restrictions on the freedom of speech and expression, assembly and 
association in the interests of the sovereignty -and integrity of India. This new 
ground was added in order to prevent citizens from making sessionist 
speeches. It also amended Arts. 84 and 173 and the from of oath contained 
in the Third Schedule. The members of the Parliament and State Legislatures, 
Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts and Comptroller and Auditor- 
General of India have now to take oath to uphold the sovereignty and Integrity 
of India. 

Seventeenth Amendment, 1964. 

The Amendment extended the scope of Art. 31-Aand Ninth Schedule to 
protect certain agrarian reform enacted by the Kerala and the Madras States. 
The word “estates” in Art. 31A now includes any jagir or warn, muafi or any 
other grant and janman right in the State of Kerala and Madras, and also 
ryotwari lands. It added the Kerala Agrarian Reforms Act, 1961 and Madras 
Land Reforms Act, which were declared unconstitutional by the Supreme 
Court to the Nioth Schedule to immune them from being challenged in a court 



3s] Constitutional amendments 447 

Eighteenth Amendment, 1966. 

This Amendment extended the scope of Art. 3 by adding explanations. 
It made clear that the word ‘State’ in that Art. includes Union Territory. 
This was done for the purpose of empowering Parliament to re-organise State 
of Punjab and the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh. 

Ninteenth Amendment, 1966. 

It amended Art. 324 and took away the power of the Election Commis- 
sion to appoint election tribunals for deciding election disputes of the members 
of Parliament and the State legislatures. 

Twentieth Amendment, 1966. 

The Amendment added a new provision in Art. 233-A to the Constitution, 
which was enacted for validating certain appointments and judgments of dis- 
trict courts in the Uttar Pradesh. It was passed to remove difficulties created 
by the decision of the Supreme Court in Chandra Alohaicle v. Uttar Pradesh, 
A. I. R. 1966 S. C. 1987. In this case the Court had declared the U. P. 
Higher Judiciary Rules unconstitutional on the ground that these rules provide 
for appointment of District Judges not in consultation with High Court as 
stipulated in the Constitution but on the recommendation of a Selection Com- 
mittee appointed by the Governor. 

Twenty-First Amendment, 1966. 

The Amendment amended Schedule VHf to the Constitution and added 
‘Sindbi’ as constitutionally recognised language in India. 

Twenty-Second Amendment, 1969. 

It was passed to empower the Parliament to form an autonomous State 
within the State of Assam and provide for the creation of legislature or Coun- 
cil of Ministers for these States. The new Art. 244-A empowered Parliament 
to form the autonomous State of Meghalaya within the State of Assam. 
Article 371 -A, a new Article, was added to provide for the constitution of a 
Committee of the Legislative Assembly of the State consisting of members of 
the Assembly elected from the tribal areas specified in Part A. 

Twenty-Third Amendment, 1969. 

This Amendment was enacted to extend the safeguards granted by the 
Constitution to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for a further period 
of 10 years by substituting the words “thirty years” for the words “iwenty 
years” in Art. 334. 

Twenty-Fourth Amendment, 1971. 

This Amendment was passed to remove difficulties created by the decision 
of the Supreme Court in Golaknath v. State of Punjab. The Court had held that 
an amendment under Art. 368 was a 'law' within the meaning of Art. 1 
of the Constitution. Secondly, that Art. 368 lays down only procedure f 0 r 
amendment and the power to amend is vested in Art. 245. It amended Art. 
368 and Art. 13 of the Constitution. Amended Art. 368 makes it clear that Art. 
368 lays down power as well as procedure thereof. It has not only removed 
the restrictions placed by the Golak ffoth’s case but has extended the power 
of amendment by adding the words, 'Parliament may amend by way of 
addition, variation or repeal any provision of the Constitution’. The amended 
Art. 13 makes it clear that a constitutional amendment shall not be considered 
as a 'law' within the meaning of Art. 13. 

In Kesasanand Phartl's case, the Supreme Court has upheld the validity of 
the Constitution (24th Amendment) Act, 1972. 



CONSmOnoNAL LAW OF INDIA 


Chap. 


Twenty-Fifth Amendment, 1971. 

Il was passed to remove the difficulties created by the decision of the 
Supreme Court in the Bank Nationalisation case (R. C. Cooper v. Union of India, 
A. I. R. 1970 S. C. 564). It amended clause (2) of Art. 31 and substituted 
the word ‘amount’ foe the word ‘compensation’ and added the words ‘that 
the whole or any part of such amount is to be given otherwise than in cash.’ 
Before the amendment the word ‘compensation’ was interpreted by the Sup- 
reme Court in R. C. Cooper v. Union of India, A. I. R. 1970 S. C. 561, ‘just 
equivalent’ of what the owner has been deprived of. It added a new clause, 
clause (2- A) which makes it clear that a deprivation law passed under Art. 
31 cannot be challenged on the ground that it infringes rights guaranteed in 
Art. 1 9 of the Constitution. 

It inserted a new Article, i. e. Art. 3I-C which provides that a law passed 
for giving effect to the directive principles specified in clause (b) or clause (c) of 
Art. 39 cannot be challenged on the ground that it is inconsistent with or takes 
away or abridges any of the rights guaranteed in Arts. 14, 19 and 31. 

The validity of this Amendment has been upheld in the Kesavanand 
Bharii's case. 


Twenty-Sixth Amendment; 1971. 

This Amendment was necessitated by the decision of the Supreme Court 
in Privy Purse case ( Madhav Rao Schindia v. Union of India, A. I. R. 1971 S. C. 
530) in which the Presidential Order de-recognising the privileges of the Ex- 
Rulers of Indian States was declared to be unconstitutional The ptivy purse 
was held to be property and therefore it could not be taken away merely by 
an executive order. The Amendment omitted Arts. 29 1 and 362 and inserted 
a new provision. Art. 363-A which provided for non-recognition of any 
person who at any time was recognised as ruler of an Indian State and declared 
that privy purse is abolished and all rights, liabilities and obligations in 
lespect of privy putse are extinguished. 


Twenty-Seventh Amendment, 1971. 

This Amendment was passed consequent to the North Eastern Areas Re- 
organisation Plan- It amended Articles 239-A and 240 and added two new 
articles, i, e. Arts. 239-B and 37I-C. The amended Art. 240 made certain 
special provisions for the new Union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal 
Pradesh. Article 371-C, a new provision, provided for the Constitution and 
function of a Committee of the Legislative Assembly of the new State of Mani- 
pur and for the special responsibility of the Governor. 


Twenty-Eighth Amendment, 1972. 

The Amendment abolished the special privileges enjoyed by the Members 
of the Indian Civil Services. Consequently it inserted a new Article, /. e .. Art. 
312-A which empowers Parfiament to vary service conditions, etc. of the mem- 
bers wf the Indian Civil Services. Article 11 4 which conferred these privileges 
on the members of I. C. S. has therefore been omitted. 


However, Art. 312-A will not affect the condition of service of the Judges 
of the Supreme Court and High Courts, the Comptroller and AuditortGeneial 
of India. Members of Union and the States Public Service Commissions. 
Twenty-Ninth Amendment, 1972. 


The Amendment added two more Acts, namely, the KecaU T mil 


CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS 


449 


38] 


Thirtieth Amendment, 1972. 

It amended Art. 133 of the Constitution and thereby abolished the valua- 
tion basis of civil appeals against the High Court judgments. The amended 
Att. 133 now provides that an appeal can be filed in the Supreme Court only 
if the High Court certifies that the case involves a substantial question of 
general importance. 

Thirty-First Amendment, 1974. 

The Amendment Act has amended Art. 81 of the Constitution. It has 
raised the limit for representation in the Lok Sabha from 325 to 545. 


Thirty-Second Amendment, 1974. 

It amends Art. 371 and inserts a new Article, nemely, Art. 37 ID. The 
new Article 37t-D provides certain special provisions with respect to the State 
of Andhra Pradesh. 


Thirty-Third Amendment, 1974. 

The Amendment was an outcome of Gujarat movement where coercive 
methods were used to compel members of a Legislative Assembly to resign 
their seats. It amended Arts. 101 and 190 of the Constitution. The amended 
Article provides that the resignation of the members of Parliament and the 
State Legislatures may be accepted by the Speaker only if he is satisfied that 
the resicnation is voluntary or genuine. If be is satisfied that a member has 
resigned under threat or coercion he shall not accept his resignation. 

Thirty-Fourth Amendment, 1974. 

It amended the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution for the fourth time 
and added seventeen Land Reforms Acts relating particularly to ceiling on land 
holdings enacted by the various States. With the addition of those Acts the 
number of Acts which are immune from being challenged in a court oflaw 
has risen to 86. 

Thirty-Fifth Amendment, 1974. 

The Amendment was passed with a view to give effect to the unanimous 
resolution adopted by the Sikkim Assembly requesting the Government of 
India to take necessary step for the participation of the people of Sikkim in 
India’s Parliamentary system. The Amendment inserted a new Article f. e.. 
Art 2-A and the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution. Article 2- A conferred 
on Sikkim the status of an ‘Associate State’. The amendment enabled it to send 
one representative in each of the two Houses of the Parliament. The newly 
added 10th Schedule provided the terms and conditions or Sikkimese 
association with India and India’s responsibilities Under the Temh 
Schedule, the responsibilities of the Government of India will relate to 
defence, communications, external relations, economic and : soc,al ' 
provision of facilities for the Sikkimese students for higher learning in Iad la 
and for participation in all India Services and for participation .in .the polity 
institutions of India. These provisions, however, were not enforceable i a a 
court of law. 



450 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


elections to Parliament from Sikkim shall be with the Election Commission 
of India. 

Thirty-Sixth Amendment, 1975. 

This amendment has made Sikkim a Full-fledged State of the Indian 
Union. It has amended the, First Schedule to the Constitution and included 
Sikkim as the 22nd State of the Indian Union. Fourth Schedule of the Consti- 
tution was also amended to enable Sikkim to send one representative in the 
Rajya Sabha. A new Article, 371 F, was added to the Constitution which pro- 
vides for special provisions with respect to the State of Sikkim. Under 
the 'new Article the Governor of Sikkim shall have special responsibility for 
peace and for an equitable arrangement for ensuring the special and economic 
advancement of different sections of the population of Sikkim and in discharge 
of his special responsibility under this clause, tbe Governor of Sikkim shall 
subject to the directions of tbe President, act in his discretion. In reply the 
criticism of this provision tbe External Affairs Minister assured the members 
that the Governor would use these powers under tbe direction of tbe President, 
The President being a constitutional head, acts on the advice of the Council of 
Ministers which in turn is responsible to the Parliament. He said 'it was 
essential to give certian discretionary powers of the Governor keeping in view 
the national security.* 

Under this Article the State of Sikkim has been allotted one seat in the 
Lok Sabha. 

The Amendment omits the provisions added by the Constitution (35th 
Amendment) Act. Article 2-A is omitted and consequential changes in Arts. 
80 (1) and 81 (1) are aslo made. Tenth Schedule is also omitted. 
Thirty-Seventh Amendment, 1975. 

It provides for tbe creation of Legislative Assembly and Council of 
Minister for the newly established State of Arunachai. For this purpose it 
amends Arts. 239A and 240 of the Constitution. In the above Articles word 
•Arunachai* is added after the Pondicherry and Mizoram. 

Thirty-Eighth Amendment, 1975. 

The Amendment puts beyond judicial scrutiny the “satisfaction" of the 
President in declaring the Emergency as also the Ordinance-making powers of 
the President, Governors and Administrators of Union Territories. As for the 
declaration of Emergency the Law Minister accepted that the courts had held 
consistently that it was outside their jurisdiction to assess whether an emer- 
gency existed or not. Thus the legal position is clear. However, the amend- 
ment was being brought to make this well-known legal position clear "without 
a shadow of doubt”. 

The Act amends Arts. 123, 213, 239-B, 352, 359 and 360 of the Constitu- 
tion. 

In Articles 123, 213 and 239-B a new clause has been inserted which 
provides that notwithstanding anything in the Constitution Ihe satisfaction of 
the President, the Governor and the Administrator of Union territory shall 
be final and conclusive and shall not be questioned in any Court on anv 
Ground. 3 






38 ) 


CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS 


451 


proclamations on different grounds whether or not there is a proclamation 
already issued by the President under clause (1) and such proclamation is in 
operation. 

Thirty-ninth Amendment, 1975. 

This Amendment Act amended Att. 71 of the Constitution and toot 
away the jurisdiction of the Courts to decide the election disputes of the Presi- 
dent Vice-President, the Prime Minister or the Speaker. The dispute relating 
to election of the holder of these offices were taken out of the jurisdiction of 
the Courts According to this amendment all disputes relating to elections of 
the President. Vice President, Prime Minister and the Speaker were to be decid- 
ed by a fotum to be established by a law made by Parliament. As regards-the 
composition and the function of the fotum envisaged in the amendment, it was 
said that it would not be a judicialliody having paraphernalia of a Court. 

Prior to this amendment. Art. 71 provided that disputes arising out of the 
election of the President ot Vice-President should be decided by the Supreme 
r™,rt The matters relating to the election of the Prime Minister and the 
Sneaker were regulated by the ptovisions of the Representation of the Peoples 
Actf 195 founder which the High Court had the jurisdiction to decide such 

d ' SP “ The Amendment estended the same protection to the Prime Minuter and 
the Sneaker The Amendment also provided that the pending proceedings 
me bpeaKer. i election of the ho der of the above-mentioned offices 
m A,r P me existing £ io5d be null and void. In extending the 
motection o dii provision to the Prime Minister and the Speaker, 
protection oi v out how the Prime Minister was not only 

l *? e ,!T JT't majority of the people but was “recognised throughout 
breadth of the country as the undisputed leader” she should not 
Selection could be set aside even on the 

flimsiest grounds. pto y ide d that no election (a) to either House of 

me new ftn. A . . th 0 f a prime Minister at the time of 

Parliament of a ■ as p f : mc Minister after such election (b) to the 

such election °PP°‘“ te r soQ who hoids the office of Speaker cf that 
House of the * c Son or who is chosen as the Speaker for that 

House atthetime of * question except before such autho- 

House after such election, snau w « v* provided for by or under any law 

rity °r body and l m sui cbm n er s w* P h , aw cre3ting a f otU m and the 

« S& — * -* ' ,0, be calkd in 

question in nmvided that where any person is appointed a 

Clause (3) of Alt. piovineouia f ^ g „ 3t ' er r of the House of the 

Prime Minister or Jjm -Jiition referred to in clause (b) of Art. 329 in respect 
People, while an “"° f p lrl iament or to the House of the People is 

of his election to either Ho b (OB being appointed 

pending, such .ekm "g '■>« .“e^ffice of .be Speaker of the House 

of Ihe'people. 1 ^ However, such election maybe called in question unde, an, 
,U ' h KrSonVrfrte “Sd^Art. 329A ) shall have effect nnt.llh.uad- 

ing anything eontaind m the ConstJ |bc Amt „dment added 37 

In the Ninth Schedule of lhcse enactments cannot be challenged 

Central and State La** important Central Acts included in the Ninth Schedule 



452 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


ate the Representation of the Peoples Act, 1951, tbc Representation of the 
People (Amendment) Act, 1974, the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975, and 
the Maintenance of the Internal Security Act, 1971. 

Fortieth Amendment, 1976. 

This Amendment has amended the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution and 
inserted 64 new Central and State Land Reform Laws in the Schedule. With 
the addition of 64 new laws the total number of laws so far included in tbe 
Ninth Schedule to the Constitution stood at 188. 

The Amendment has also substituted a new Article for the existing 
Art. 297. The substituted Art. 297 empowers Parliament to specify by law 
the limits of the countries territorial waters, the continental shelf, the exclu- 
sive economic race sad other a 3 ci time rones. The Amendment has thus 
widened the scope of Art. 297 which provides that all lands, minerals and other 
things of valuables under the ocean within the exclusive economic zone of 
India shall rest in the Union. Before the Amendment, the limits of territorial 
waters and its continental shelf were determined by proclamation issued by 
the President. The amended Articles now make it clear that the country’s 
sovereignly extends not only to the sea-bed but also the living creatures in the 
waters above within prescribed maritime limit. 

Forty-first Amendment, 1976. 

This Amendment has amended the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution to 
rationalise scheduled areas for the purpose of tribal development. Secondly, 
it has raised the age of retirement of the members of the State Public Service 
Commissions from 60 to o2 years. The Fifth Schedule to the Constitution 
makes special provision for the administration of tribal areas and provides a 
broad and flexible framework for effective legal and administrative action. 
Forty-second Amendment, 1976. 

The Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 has inserted two new 
1VA anc * XIV A and nine Articles— 39A, 43A, 48A, 131 A, 139A, I44A, 
226A,228Aand 257A in the Constitution and also amended 50 articles of the 
Constitution. 


•c gamble.— The Amendment had inserted three new words 'Socialist* 
secular and 'integral’ in the Preamble. These concepts have been clearly 
spelt out in the amendments to the Preamble. 

™***?r* A **'P* , r-* has ii serted a new Article 31D which empowers 

* ra .- .? m , * aw . P r °hibitiog and preventing ‘anti-national activities' 

to S 5SOC i a 5 L° n s - * • !t declares that no such law shall be deemed 

* *» ““!■*» «» u .rffiSKu.sr made “ ndet ,kis a,,ioi! 

so as Ptinciof nded i Articlc 31C and widened its . sc ° pc 

principles over the fundamental rights?*' 11 **** ie> ,W '" c " ve 

tution* rtiClCS 39A ’ 43A> 48A hav * ®dded three new directives to the Consti- 


2 . 

3. 


Equal justice and fret l cga I 
Participation of workers in 
Portection and improvement 
forests and wild life. 


management of industries, 
environment and safeguarding of 



38 ] 


CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS 


453 


It has also amended Art. 39 (f) with a view to emphasize the constructive 
role of (he State with regard to children. 

Fundamental Duties. The Amendment added a new Part IVA to 
the Constitution which lays down ten fundamental duties for all the citizens of 
India. The fundamental duties are intended to serve a constant reminder 
to every citizen that while the Constitution specially conferred on him certain 
fundamental rights, equally the citizens are also required to observe certain 
basic norms of democratic conduct and democratic behaviour. It shall be the 
duty of every citizen oflndia— 

“(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, 
the National Flag and the National Anthem ; 

(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national 
struggle for freedom ; 

(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India, 

(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to 
do so ; 

(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst 
all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sec- 
tional diversities ; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women ; 

(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture ; 

(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, 
lakes, rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures ; 

(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry 
and reform ; 

(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence ; 

(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective 

activity so that the nation constantly rise* to higher levels of endeavour and 
achievement.” , 

Parliament, Executive and State Legislature*. Article 55 was amend- 
ed to make it clear that the "population” of the country for the purposes of 
allocation of seats, in Parliament and the State Assemblies will be determined 
on the basis of the 1971 census and wilt remain the same till the year 2C00. 
This has been done in accordance with the new population policy of the 
Government of India. The re-delimitation of constituencies undertaken after 
each census will take elTcct hereafter on dates to be specified by the President. 
Accordingly, it makes consequential changes in the relevant articles, namely 
articles 81 and 82 relating to Lok Sabha, Article 170 relating to the Legislative 
Assemblies of States, Article 55 relating to the electon of the President and 
Articles 330 and 332 relating to reservation of seats for Scheduled castes and 
Scheduled tribes ia Lok Sabha and the Legislative Assemblies. 

The Amendment amends article 74 and makes it clear that the President 
who acts on the advice of the Council of Ministers "shall be bound by such 
advice”. It has also amended Art. 77 which now prohibits courts or any 
other authority to order production of the rules made by Government for the 
more convenient transaction of Ibe business of the Government of India. This 
Amendment is intended to remove the difficulties created by the order of the 
Allahabad High Court in the Prime Minister’s Election case. In that case, the 
court had ordered the Government of Uttar Pradesh to produce such rules for 
its scrutiny. 

The amendment extended th* duration of the Lok Sahba and the 
State Assemblies from the present "five years” to "six years”. Accordingly it 



452 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


sre the Representation of the Peoples Act, 1951, the Representation of the 
People (Amendment) Act, 1974. the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975, and 
tbe Maintenance of the Internal Security Act, 1971. 

Fortieth Amendment, 1976. 

This Amendment has amended the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution and 
inserted 64 new Central and State Land Reform Laws in tbe Schedule. With 
the addition of 64 new laws the total number of laws so far included in the 
Ninth Schedule to the Constitution stood at 188. 

The Amendment has also substituted a new Article for the existing 
Ait. 297. The substituted Art. 297 empowers Parliament to specify by law 
the limits of the countries territorial waters, tbe continental shelf, the exclu- 
sive economic zone and other maritime zones. The Amendment has thus 
widened the scope of Art. 297 which provides that all lands, minerals and other 
things of valuables under the ocean within the exclusive economic zone of 
India shall rest in the Union. Before the Amendment, the limits of territorial 
waters and its continental shelf were determined by proclamation issued by 
the President. The amended Articles now make it clear that the country’s 
sovereignty extends not only to the sea-bed but also the living creatures in the 
waters above within prescribed maritime limit. 

Forty-first Amendment, 1976. 

This Amendment has amended the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution to 
rationalise scheduled areas for the purpose of tribal development. Secondly, 
it has raised the age of retirement of the members of the State Public Service 
Commissions from 60 to t>2 years. The Fifth Schedule to the Constitution 
makes special provision for the administration of tribal areas and provides a 
broad and flexible framework for effective legal and administrative action. 
Forty-second Amendment, 1976. - 1 • 

The Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 has inserted two new 
Parts— IVA and X1VA and nine Articles— 39A, 43A, 48A, 131 A. 139A, 144A, 
226 A, 228 A and 257A in the Constitution and also amended 50 articles of the 
Constitution. 


Preamble.— The Amendment had inserted three new words ’Socialist’ 
•Secular’ and ’integral’ in the Preamble. These concepts have been clearly 
spelt out in the amendments to the Preamble. 

Fundamental Rights.— It has ii serted a new Article 3 ID which empowers 
Parliament to make law for prohibiting a D d preventing ’anti-national activities’ 
and ’anti-national associations'. It declares that no such law shall be deemed 
to be void on tbe ground that it is inconsistent with or takes away or abridges 
any of the rights conferred by Articles 14. 19 and 31. The above exnressions 
have been defined in detail in the Amendment. Laws made under this article 
will be an exception to Article 13 of the Constitution. 

Directive Principles —It has amended Article 3IC and widened its scooe 
so as to cover all directive principles. It gives supremacy to the directive 
principles over the fundamental tights. c 

Articles 39A, 43 A, 48 A have added three new directives to the Consti- 
tution : - 


1. Equal justice and free legal aid. 


2. Participation of workers in tbe management of Industries 

3 ' of -I 


of 



38) 


CONSIlttmONAt AMENDMENTS 


45J 


composed of a minimum of seven judges. The Amendment makes consequen- 
tial changes in Art. 145 as result of the insertion of Articles 13IA, 139A and 
144 A in the Constitution. 

High Courts.— As regards the High Courts, the Amendment has made 
the following changes : It amends Art. 217 and adds a new qualification to 
the existing qualifications to be fulfilled by a person for appointment as a High 
Court judge. It protides that a “distinguished jurist” is also qualified to be 
appointed as o High Court judge. The Amendment has omitted the proviso 
to Art. 2T5 which gate jurisdiction to the High Courts on revenue matters. 
The High Courts shall have now no jurisdiction on revenue matters. Dispute 
relating to revenue matters will now be decided by the Tribunals to be 
established by a Parliamentary Law under the new Art. 323D, added by the 
42nd Amendment Act. 1976. The Amendment has made significant changes 
in Art. 226. The new Article 226 redefines the writ-jurisdiction of the High 
Court. It has deleted the words “for any other purpose” which gave jurisdic- 
tion over other legal rights to the High Courts. The jurisdiction of the High 
Courts is now restricted to (a) for the enforcement of fundamental rights ; 
(b) cases involving substantial injury to citizens because of the contravention 
of any provision of the Constitution or any other enactments ; and (c) cases of 
substantial failure of justice due to any illegality in any proceedings under 
sub-clause (b). 

Even in such extreme cases, clause (3) of Art. 226 requires a person to 
satisfy the Court that he has no other remedy. If some alternative remedy 
is available (whether it is adequate or not) the High Court shall not entertain 
any petition for the redress orinjury referred to under sub-clause (b) or(c) 
of clause 0)- The new clause (4) prohibits High Courts to “issue any interim, 
stay or injunction” unless the respondent (the Government) has been given 
opportunity to be beard. However, the High Court may grant interim order 
if it is satisfied that the citizen is likely to suffer loss or damage that cannot be 
compensated in money. Such interim order shall cease to have effect on the 
expiry of the period of 14 days unless the requirement of clause (4) have been 
complied with before the expiry of that period. 

But even this exception to clause (4) cannot be invoked if it results in 
delaying either (I) any inquiry into a matter of public importance or (2) any 
action or work or project of public utility or (3) acquisition of any property 
for such purpose by the Government— C/uure 6. 

Article 226A excludes from the jurisdiction of High Courts the question 
of the validity of Central laws. The Amendment deletes the word “tribunal” 
from Art. 227 and makes it dear that the High Court shall have no jurisdiction 
over tribunals. A hierarchy of tribunals will be set up to decide tax matters, 
import and export disputes, labour and industrial disputes, land reform and 
urban ceiling disputes, election disputes, services matters and matters relating 
to supply of food arid essential commodities. Article 228 has been a uended 
and the power of the High Courts to withdraw cases from subordinate courts 
involving substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitu- 
tion has been made subject to the new Article 131A which gives exclusive 
jurisdiction to the Supreme Court to decide the validity of Central laws to 
the exclusion of the High Courts. Article 228A provides that for determining 
the validity of a Stale Law the High Court Bench shall consist of not Jess than 
five judges, and no State law can be declared invalid except by the majority of 
two-thirds of the number of judges constituting the Bench. But where a High 
Court consists of less than five Judges, a law will not be declared invalid unless 
all the iudees concur It means where the number is less than five absolute 



381 


CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS 


457 


(I) flection disputes of the members of the House of Parliament or the 
House of the Legislature of a State, except matters referred to in 
Articles 323 and J23-A, 

(g) production, procurement, supply and distribution of foodstuffs, and 

other essential goods, , 

(h) offences against laws with respect to above matters, 

(i) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses 
(a) to (h). 

Such a law will define jurisdiction and powers of tribunals and will lay 
down its procedure. It may also provide for the exclusion of the jurisdiction 
of all courts except the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 136. 

Emergency —The Amendment has amended Arts. 352, 353, 356, 357, 358 
and 359. In Article 352 it has inserted the following words “in respect of the 
whole of India or of such parts of territory of India thereof as may be specified 
in the proclamation". This will enable the President to make a proclamation 
of emergency either in respect of any part of tbe country or to the whole of 
India. At present, the proclamation of emergency applies to the whole of 
India. Asa consequence of this change in clause (1) the amendment has 
added the words "or varied” after the word “revoked” in clause (21 of this 
Article. Tbe emergency proclamation may be lifted from such part of the 
territory of India where the conditions are normal in the opinion of the 
President. 

The Amendment made a consequential change in Arts. 353, 358, 359. The 
new proviso in Art. 353 provides that where a proclamation of emergency is in 
operation in any part of the country the executive power of the Union shall 
extend also to any other State other than a State where emergency is in opera- 
tion if the security of India or any part of tbe country is threatened by activi- 
ties in the part of the territory of India in which proclamation of emergency is 
in operation. 

The Amendment substituted the words “one year” for the words 
“six months” in clause (4) of Article 356, An emergency proclamation made 
under Article 356. if approved by Parliament will continue in operation for a 
year, instead of six months as it stands now. The Amendment has substituted 
a new clause for clause (2) of Article 357. This is a saving clause. It saves 
the proclamation of emergency under Article 356 and all laws passed by Par- 
liament and actions taken by the President in exercise of tbe powers of the 
State legislature under Art. 356. AH laws passed and actions taken under it 
shall continue to be in force until altered, repealed or amended by the compe- 
tent legislature. 

Amendment. — The Amendment added two new clauses (4) and (5) to the 
Art. 368 of the Constitution. Clause (4) provides that “no constitutional 
amendment made under Art. 368 shall be called in question in any Court on 
any ground.” Clause (5) provides that for the removal of doubts, it is dec- 
lared that there shall be no limitation whatever on the constituent power of 
Parliament to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal the provisions of 
this Constitution under this article. This amendment, it has been claimed, 
would establish tbe supremacy of Parliament which represents the will of the 
people. This amendment removes tbe limitations imposed on the amending 
power of Parliament by the ruling of the Supreme Court in Kesavananda 
Bharati’s case. In that case, the Court held that while Parliament has power to 
amend any part of tbe Constitution, tbe power cannot be exercised so as to 
alter or destroy the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution. 

There appears to be a conflict between clause (1) and newly added clause 

Const. 58 



456 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


majority of Judges will be required to declare a law unconstitutional. In 
computing the number of judges of a High Court for this purpose, a Judge 
who is disqualified by reason of personal or pecuniary bias shall be excluded. 
This provision may affect the independence and impartiality of the Judiciary. 

Relation between the Union and the States.— The Amendment had added 
anew Article 257- A to the Constitution. This article empowered the Central 
Government to send any armed or police force to any State to deal with 
“grave" law and order situation. Such force will act in accordance with the 
Central Government’s directives. Parliament may, by law, define the powers, 
functions and liabilities of members of such force. This is intended to remove 
any doubts about the power to the Central Government to send aimed force 
or police force to any State for the maintenance of grave law and order 
situation. 

The Amendment Act amended the Seventh Schedule to the Consti- 
tution and transferred certain entries from one List to another. The subjects 
which have been transferred from List II (State List) to List III (Concurrent 
List) are— 

(1) administration of justice, constitution and organisation of all courts 
except the Supreme Court and the High Courts, 

(2) education, 

(3) weight and measures, 

(4) forests, 

(5) protection of wild animals and birds. 

In List I the amendment bad inserted a new Eotry 2A (deployment of any 
armed force or other force of the Union in any State for maintaining grave law 
and order situation'. There is a consequential amendment following the 
insertion of new Article 257-A in the Constitution. Entry I of List II has 
consequently been redefined to make it clear that any armed or police force 
deployed in the State under Art. 257-A shall not be under the control of the 
State Government but under the Central Government. 

Services.— The Amendment amends Art. 311 of the Constitution and takes 
away the right of a Government servant to make representation at the second 
stage of the enquiry. The amended Art. 312 provides for the creation of an 
'all-India judicial service’. The all-India judicial service shall not include any 
post inferior to that of [a district judge. The law providing for a creation of 
the all-India judicial service shall not be deemed to be an amendment of this 
Constitution for the purposes of Article 368. 

Tribunals. — The Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act added a new 
Chapter to the Constitution, entitled as “Tribunals”. It consists of two Articles 
— Arts. 323-A and 323-B. Article 323-A provides for the establishment of 
Administrative Tribunals by a Parliamentary law for determining disputes 
relating to the recruitment and conditions of service of Central Government 
servants and servants of the States. Article 323-B provides for the creation of 
various tribunals for the determination of disputes, complaints with respect of 
all or auy of the matters specified in clause (2). They are as fallows : — 

(a) tax matters, 

(b) foreign exchange, import and export, 

(c) industrial and labour disputes, 

(d) land reform laws, 

(e) ceilings on urban property. 



381 


. CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS 


459 


and the High Courts to deal with pending cases in the same manner as if the 
abovementioned articles had never been added to the Constitution. Necessary 
consequential amendments to Articles 145, 228 and 366 have also been made. 

Article 31 D which conferred special power on Parliament to enact laws to 
prohibit anti-national activities has also been omitted. It was thought that the 
powers of Parliament to make laws under Article 316 were of a sweeping 
nature and were capable of abuse. Hence, it has been omitted. 

Forty-fourth Amendment Act, 1978. 

This Amendment seeks to remove the distortions that the 42nd Amend- 
ment had brought about in the Constitution during the Emergency. Not only 
this, the Amendment has considerably modified the emergency provisions of 
the Constitution so as to ensure that it is not misused in future. As passed 
by the Lok Sabha the bill consisted of 49 clauses but the Rajya Sabha, which 
is dominated by the Congress Party, has rejected five clauses of the Amend- 
ment. 

Parliament, Executive and Slate Legislature — Parliament . — The 44th 
Amendment Act, 1978 has amended Articles 83, 172 and 371 F, respectively of 
the Constitution and has restored the term of the Lok Sabha and the State 
Legislative Assemblies to ‘five years’ which was extended to ‘six years’ by the 
42nd Amendment Act, 1976. Accordingly, it has substituted the words ‘five 
years’ for the words ‘six years’ in Articles 83, 172 and 371 F of the Consti- 
tution. 

The Amendment has again amended Articles 103 and 192 (relating to 
decisions on questions as to disqualification of a member of Parliament and 
State legislatures) and has restored the position as it obtained parior to the 
42nd Amendment Act. Now the questions of diqualifications of the members of 
Parliament and State Legislatures will now be, as originally provided in the 
Constitution, decided by the President and the Governor, as the case may be, 
in accordance with the opinion of the Election Commission. 

Article 118 has been amended and original Articles 100 (3) and (4; and 
189 (3) have been restored. This restores the position as regards the quorum 
id the Houses of Parliament and the State Legislatures. 

The Amendment made in Article 102 (I) (a) regarding 'office of profits’ 
has been cancelled and original clause has been restored. The 42nd Amend- 
ment took away^ the powers of the Court to decide whether an office is an 
‘office of profit’. The 44th Amendment restores this power to the courts. 

A similar change has also been made in Article 191 (1) (a). The original 
Article 191 (l)(a)has been restored. Now, the courts will decide whether an 
office is an ‘office of profit’. 

The Amendment Act has again amended Articles 105 (3) and 194 (3) 
relating to the Privileges of Parliament and the State Legislatures The 42nd 
Amendment had partially omitted the reference in the House of Commons by 
proviViiig rftaf ({} (he existing’ privileges stall be (base which existed before 
the 42nd Amendment Act, 1976 ; (2) but others shall be those which may be 
evolved by the Houses of Parliament. 

The 44th Amendment restores the original article subject to the modifica- 
tion that it completely omits the reference to the privileges of the House of 
Commons in future. For this purpose, it substitutes the following words : 
“shall be those of that House and of its members and Committees immediately 
before the 44th Amendment of 1978” for the words “shall be those of the 
House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and of its 
members and committees at the commencement of this Constitution” in Articles 
105 (3) and 194 (3) of the Constitution. 



453 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


Cbap. 


(5) Clause (1) provides lhat an amendment can be challenged on the ground 
that it has not been passed in accordance with the procedure laid down in Art. 
368. Clause (5), on the other hand, says that there is no limitation ‘whatever 
on the amending power, whether substantive or procedural. 

The Amendment substituted a new sub clause (a) for the old sub-clause 
(a) of clause (1) of Art. 102. which gives Parliament power to declare by law 
which office under the Central or State Government is an “office of profit’ and 
whether the holder thereof is disqualified or not. This amendment overrules 
n long series of rulines given by the Courts. A similar change has been made 
in Article 19 fa) which" relates to Stales Legislatures. However, the power to 
specify the office will vest in Parliament and not in the State Legislature. 

The Amendment substituted a new article for Art. 103 of the Constitution, 
The new article takes away the question of disqualifications of members of the 
Central and State Legislatures from the jurisdiction of the Courts. It now 
provides that if a question arises— (I) whether a person has become subject to 
the disqualifications mentioned in Art. 102, or (2) whether he has been found 
guilty of corrupt practice at att election and thereby disqualified to be a member 
of Parliament, the question shall be referred to the President for his decision 
and the decision shall be final. The President must consult the Election 
Commission before giving his decision. 

A similar change has been made in Article 192 which relates to the State 
Legislatures 

Power of the President to remote difficulties.— This new clause popularly 
known as the removal of difficulty clause conferred on the President power to 
remove any difficulty which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the 
Constitution as amended by the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976, 
For this purpose, the President may issue such orders which appears to him 
necessary for removing the difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the 
Constitution. 

This is a transitory provision and will cease to be in force after the expiry 
of two years from (he date on which the President gives assent (o it. The 
orders mad; by the President under this clause must be laid before the 
Parliament. 


This provision has been criticised from many quarters as delegating 
“naked and wide” power to the President. Replying to this criticism, the 
Union Minister of Stale for law, Dc. V. A. Sayid Mohammad said that there 
is nothing extraordinary or undemocratic in clause 59 of the Amendment. 
Such powers existed ia the Constitutions of many other countries He said 
“the justification for giving such a power to the President is lhat whenever a 
new Constitution replaces an old one or when amendments are introduced in 
the existing Constitution many difficulties foreseen and unforeseen are bound to 
arise and such difficulties should be authorised to be removed by some agency. 
Since Parliament will not be permanently or constantly in session, the Head of 
the Slate is the most suitable, convenient and competent authority to be invested 
with necessary powers. Mr. Gokhale, the Union Law Minister said. “This 
does not mean that the President can provide for something which is not intro- 
duced in the Constitution. He can only remove if certain difficulties or lacunae 
arise in giving effect to the constitutional provisions 
Forty-third Amendment, 1977, 

a Constitution (43 rd Amendment) Act, 1977, has amended the 42nd 

^^ D d ID H“ t u A ^ w ‘ tha ^ ewic,r<:st ? re . the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court 

226A a B dM8A°U^ko^ D L eqUC,lt y *- , i h3S •°“ 5,ted Arlic,es 32A, J31A, 144A, 
. 226A acd 228A - h aIso mak « a special provision to enable the Supreme Court 



38] 


CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS 


461 


meat, decree, final order or sentence. It also omits clause (1) of Article 132 
relating to grant of special leave by Supreme Court in cases where the High 
Court refuses to give a certificate. Cases of special leave to appeal by Supreme 
Court will thus be left to be regulated exclusively by Article 136 of the Consti- 
tution. This is intended to avoid delay in matters of appeal to the Supreme 
Court from High Courts. 

Article 139A, which has been added by the 42nd Amendment gives power 
to the Supreme Court in certain circumstances, to withdraw cases from the 
High Courts and decide them itself. This Article is retained subject to some 
modification. Prior to 44tb Amendment, the court could take action under 
this article only if an application is made by the Attorney-General. The 44ih 
Amendment enables the court to do so also on the application of a party to 
any such case. Thus the court may do so either suo motu or on the application 
of the party to any such case. 

The Amendment omits sub-clause (c) of clause (2) of Article 217 which 
was inserted by the 42nd Amendment. This clause made provision for appoint- 
ing distinguished jurists as judges of the High Courts. 

The proviso to Article 225. as originally existed, gave original jurisdiction 
to the High Courts in revenue matters. The 42nd Amendment omitted this 
proviso and took away jurisdiction of the High Court in revenue matters. The 
44th Amendment now restores the said proviso to Article 225 and again gives 
original jurisdiction to the High Courts on revenue matters. 

Subject to a modification, this amendment restores Article 226 as it 
obtained prior to the 42nd Amendment Act, 1976. The provisions relating to 
the issue of an interim order as introduced by the 42nd Amendment was very 
cumbersome and detrimental to litigants. Instead of this, 44th Amendment 
introduces a simple provision in new clauses (3) aDd (4). Clause (3) provides 
that when an interim order is passed against a party ex parte (without giving 
him opportunity of being heard) that party may make an application to the 
High Court for the vacation of sneb order and the High Court must dispose of 
such an application within two weeks. If the High Court fails to dispose of 
the application within two weeks, the interim order shall stand vacated after 
the expiry of two weeks. 

This Amendment restores article to the form in which it was prior to the 
42nd Amendment Act, and this gives their power of superintendence over the 
tribunals. The 42nd Amendment had taken away this power of the High 
Courts. 

Relation between the Union and the States. 

The 42nd Amendment Act, 1976 had added a new Article 257A to the 
Constitution which empowered the Central Government to send any armed or 
police force to any State to deal with 'grave’ law and order situation. The 41th 
Amendment Act, 197S has omitted this article. 

Emergency . — The 44th Amendment makes a number of changes in Article 
352 with a view to prevent recurrence of the 1975 situation when emergency 
was declared by the Congress Government headed by Srimati Indira Gandhi 
without any adequate reason and also without consulting her Cabinet. 
The Amendment substitutes the following clauses for Cls. (2), (2-A) and (3) of 
Article 352 : ' 

t. In clause (I) the words "internal disturbance** has been substituted by 
the words "armed rebellion”. This will exclude the scope for the proclamation 
of emergency on ground of internal disturbance not involving armed rebellion. 
This means that, in future a proclamation of emergency under Article 352 can 


460 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


The Amendment has added a new Article 361A after Article 361. It 
provides constitutional protection in respect of publication of proceedings of 
Parliament and the State Legislatures and further provides that no person shall 
be liable to any civil or criminal proceedings in any Court in respect of the 
publication in a newspaper of a substantially true report of any proceedings of 
either House of Parliament or of a State Legislature, unless the publication is 
Droved to have been made with malice. This immunity will also apply to 
broadcast by means of witless. This immunity will however, not apply to the 
publication of any report of the proceedings of a secret proceedings ot a House. 
Until now, this immunity is regulated by a Parliamentary Law —Parliamentary 
Proceedings (Protection of Publication) Act, 19 6 — which was repealed, during 
the emergency of 1975 but has now been re-cDactrd. By incorporating into 
the Constitution, the Amendment puts this immunity on a very solid footing. 
The immunity is extended to publication of proceedings of a State Legislature. 
The above law applies only to parliamentary proceedings. 

Executive .— Article 71 “as originally enacted” gave jurisdiction to the 
Supreme Court to decide election disputes of the President and the Vice-Presi- 
dent. The 42nd Amendment took away the jurisdiction of the Courts to decide 
such dispute. The 44th Amendment now restores the position as it was before 
the 42nd Amendment and gives the Supreme Court jurisdiction in this 
respect. 

Article 74 as amended by the 42od Amendment made the advice of the 
Cabinet binding on the President. The 44th Amendment retains this amend- 
ment but adds a new proviso which provides that ‘the President may require 
the Council of Ministers to reconsider its advice tendered by them and that the 
President shall act in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsider- 
ation'. Thus, while the advice shall be binding on the President this amend- 
ment gives him a limited right to refer the matter back to the Council of Minis- 
ters for reconsideration of its advice given to him. This is intended to prevent 
recurrence of the situation which happened during 1975 emergency when the 
President had to sign the emergency proclamation though it had not been dis- 
cussed by the Council of Ministers. 

The 42nd Amendment Act added a new clause (4) to Articles 77 and 166 
which took away the power of court to compel production of rules for the 
production of the business of the Central Government and the State Govern- 
ments. The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 now omits clause (4) of Articles 77 
and 166 and thus restores the power of the courts in this respect. 

The 42nd Amendment Act added a new clause (4) in Articles 123, 213 and 
239B, and made the satisfaction of the President, Governor or Administrator 
final and conclusive in issuing Ordinance*. The 44th Amendment has now 
omitted clause (4) from these articles and restored the position as it obtained 
in this respect prior to the 42nd Amendment. 

Soprrmi Court and High Coarlj_Tbe 44tb Amendment Act amend. Arti- 
cles 132, 133 and 134 relating to appeals in the Supreme Court from the deci- 
s '“ s ° VS 't 0 ”,'!: I 1 "'*" AnMe >32 an appeal lies in eetlaia eases to the 

Supreme Court if the High Court grants a certificate under that article. If the 
JV®? r e ,ix s ,he cer |‘ficate, the Supreme Court may grant special leave. 
Under Article 133 an appeal hes to the Supreme Court in civil cases if the High 
u.?, r ! 8 . r £ c a certlfica ‘ e und ” that Article. Under Article 134 (1) (c) an appeal 

.application by the aggrieved party immediately after the delivery of the judg- 



38] 


CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS 


463 


(b) the Election Commission certifies that the continuance in force .of the 
proclamation is necessary on account of the difficulties in holding general 
elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned. 

Thus a proclamation under Article 356 can only be extended beyond the 
six months only if the above two conditions are fulfilled. 

Amendment of Article 358 . — The Amendment makes two changes in 
Article 358. Firstly, it provides that Article 19 will now only be suspended in 
the case of proclamation of emergency on the ground of war or external aggres- 
sion, and not in the case of a proclamation of emergency issued on the ground 
of armed rebellion. Secondly, it has added a new clause (2) to Article 358 
which provides that Art. 358 will not apply to any law which does not contain a 
recital to the effect that such law is in relation to the proclamation of emergency 
in operation when it is made or to any executive action taken. This means 
that only a law relating to emergency will be immune from being challenged 
in a court of law during emergency and not a law which is not in any way 
connected with the emergency. 

Amendment of Art. 359 . — This amendment makes two changes in Art. 359. 
Firstly, it provides that the enforcement of the right to life and personal liberty 
cannot be suspended by the Presidential Order. Consequently, in clauses (1) 
and (I-A) of Art. 359 for the words "the rights conferred by Part Ilf”, the 
words “the rights conferred by Part III ( except Articles 20 and 21)” have been 
substituted. This is intended to prevent the repetition of the situation in future 
whieh arose in the Habeas Corpus case. 

Secondly, it has added a new clause (1-B) to Art. 359 which says that the 
suspension of the enforcement of any right under Art. 359 will not apply in 
relation to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that such a law 
is in relation to the proclamation of emergency in operation when it is made or 
to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law containing such a 
recital. Thus laws unconnected with emergency can be challenged in a court of 
law even during emergency. 

Amendment of Art. 360 .— The 44th Amendment makes two changes in Art. 
360. At present clause (2) incorporates by reference the provisions of clause 
(2) of Art. 352. Since clause (2) of Art. 352 has been amended it has become 
necessary to make clause (2) of Art. 360 self-contained. Therefore CL (2) has 
been replaced by a new clause which says that a proclamation issued under 
clause (1) ot Art. 360— (a) may be revoked or varied by a subsequent procla- 
mation, (b) must be laid befo re the Houses of Parliament ; and (c) shall cease 
to operate at the expiry of two months, uni css before the expiry of two months 
it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament. If the Lok 
Sabha is dissolved during the period of two months and the resolution is passed 
by the Rajya Sabha but not by the Parliament the proclamation shall cease to 
operate at the expiry of 30 days from the date on which new Lok Sabha sits 
after itis KconstrCvtim. Unless before (bet period a rcsolatioa approving the 
proclamation is passed by Lok Sabha. 

Secondly, it omits clause (5) of Art. 360 which was inserted by the 42nd 
Amendment Act and which made the satisfaction of the President about the 
existence of financial emergency final and conclusive. The Amendment thus 
restores the position in this respect as it stood prior to the 42nd Amendment 
Act, 1976. 

Preventive detention . — The 44th Amendment has amended Art. 22 which 
deals with preventive detention and has incorporated a few safeguards against 
preventive detention : 



462 COTBimniOHAL LAW OF INDIA [Chap. 

only be made when security of India or any part thereof is threatened by war 
or external aggression or armed rebellion. 

2. It provides that the President shall not issue a proclamation of emer* 
gency unless the decision of the Cabinet that such a proclamation may be issued 
has been communicated to him in writing. This makes it clear that the Presi- 
dent must act on the advice of the Cabinet and not only on the advice of the 
Prime Minister. Ibis provides a safeguard against tbe declaration of emer- 
gency merely on the advice of the Prime Minister without consulting his cabinet 
as was done by the Ex-Prime Minister Smt. Indira Gandhi in 1975— Clauiep). 

3. It provides that a proclamation of emergency must be approved 
within a period of one month instead of two months as it exists at present, 
by resolution of both the Houses of Parliament. Also, such a resolution 
should be passed by a majority of the total membership of each House and 
not less than 2/3 majority of the members present aDd voting in each House, 
instead of 3 simple majority as it exists at present. This means that if a 
Proclamation is not approved within one month it will automatically cease to 
be in operation. Secondly, a proclamation is required to be approved by a 
special majority of Parliament .— Claw (4). 

4. A proclamation if approved by Parliament will remain in force for 
a period or six months. For tte continuance of emergency beyond tbe period 
of six mouths, approval of Parliament will bo required. At present, once 
approved by Parliament, the proclamation may remain in force for an inde- 
finite period at the sweetwiU of the Executive. This Amendment requires 
periodical review (six months) of proclamation by Parliamant . — Clause (5). 

5. A proclamation of emergency will cease to be operative whenever a 
resolution to that effect is adopted by the Lok Sabha by a simple majority of 
the members of the House present and voting . — Clause (6). Clause (8) provides 
that where a notice in writing signed by not less than 1/10 of the total 
members of Lok Sabha has-been given of their intention to move a resolution 
disapproving the continuance of a proclamation of emergency- 

fa) to the Speaker, if the House is in session ; or 

(b) to the President, if the House is not in session, a special sitting of the 
House shall be held within 14 days from the date on which such notice is 
received by tbe Speaker or tbe President, for the purpose of considering such 
resolution. Thus 1/10 of the members may by notice, requisition meeting of 
the Lok Sabha for the purpose of considering the continuance or discontinuance 
of a proclamation of emergency. 

Clause (4) is renumbered and for the words ‘internal disturbance,’ the 
words “armed rebellion” has been substituted. 

Clause (5) which made the satisfaction of tbe President ‘final’ has been 
omitted. Clause (5) was added to Article 352 by the 38th Amendment. 

Amendment of Art. 356 . — In clause (4) for the words *ODe year’ the words 
“six months from the date of proclamation” has been substituted. This 
amendment thus restores the original position in this respect (that is, six 
months). This was extended to one year by the 42nd Amendment Act. Secondly 
it omits clause (5) which made the ‘satisfaction’ of the President ‘final’. In place 
of clause (5) a new clause has been added which provides that a resolution for 
the continuance in force of a proclamation beyond the period of six months 
cannot be passed by the House, unless — 

(a) a proclamation of emergency is in operation at the time of the oassine 
of such resolution ; and P » 



INDEX 


A 

AVdiWir 
of titles, 100 
of untouchability, 89 
Acts and Regulations 
validation of, 187 
Acting Chief Justice, 240 
Ad hoc Jadge, 240 
Advisory Judiciary, 251 
Administrative Relations, 311 
Admission of new States, 37 
Adult suffrage, 28 
Administrative Discretion gj 
All India Federation 

under the Government of India 
Act, 1935, 12 
All India Services, 343 
Amendment of the Constitution, 430 
of fundamental rights 433 
procedure for the, 43^ 

Anglo Indians, 401 

Annual Financial Statement /Bud/ap, 

Appellate Jurisdiction I 

of the Supreme Court 257 
by Special leave, 263 ’ 

Appointment 

of the Prime Minister 223 
of the Chief Ministerial 
of }bc High Court Judges, 296 
of the Judge of the Supreme Court. 
248 

of the Members 0 f t h c Public 
Service Commission 390 
of the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General of India, J 47 
of Attorney-General of India, 231 
Appropriation Bill, 232 
Arrest 

safeguard against, 1$2 
Assent to Bills 
by President, 242 
by Governor, 293 


Attorney-General of India, 231 
Authorities 
’ mezafag of, 54 

B 

Backward classes, 88 

special provision for, 88 
reservation of posts for, 96 
•‘Begar” 

meaning of, 167 
prohibition of, 167 
Borrowing Power, 353 


Cabinet Mission, 15 
Certiorari 
. nature of, 309 
Charter of 1726, 3 
Charter Act of 1813, 6 
Charter Act of 1833. 6 
Charter Act of 1853, 6 
Citizenship 

meaning of, 40 
by birth, 43 
by descent, 43 
by domicile, 40 
by registration, 43 
by naturalisation, 44 _ 
of migrants from Pakistan, 42. 
of persons of Indian origin residing 
outside India, 43 

of persona who migrated to Tndi a 
from Pakistan^ before the com. 
mencement of the Constitution 
42 

renunciation, 4S 

termination, 45 , 

under the Citizenship Act, 1955, 4^ 
of Commonwealth, 46 
civil proceedings, 260 
Civil post 

meaning of the term, 382 
Classification 
basis of, 72 



464 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


[Chap. 


1 . It restricts the maximum period for which a person may be detained 
without obtaining the opinion of the Advisory Board front (3 
months as at present) to 2 months. 

2. The Advoisory Board shall now consist of a Chairman and not less 

than two other members. The Chairman of the Board shall be a 
sitting Judge of High Court and other two members may be 
sitting or retired judges of the High Court. The composition of 
the Board shall be ia accordance with the recommendations of the 
Chief Justice of the appropriate High Couil. The Advisory Board 
will not be free from executive control and will be under the 
control of Judiciary and would thus be an independent body. 

3. Nothing in clause (a) will authorise the detention of any person be- 
yond the maximum period prescribed by any law made by Parlia- 
ment. 

4. In every case of preventive detention beyond the period of two 
months the consultation with the Advisory Board is necessary. 

Property right .— The 44th Amendment takes away the right to property 
from the category of fundamental rights and makes it a right which can be 
regulated by ordinary law. Consequently, it makes the following changes : 

(1) U omits sub-clause (f) of Art. 19 (1). 

(2) It omits Article 31. 

(3) It has inserted a new Article 300-A under the Heading ‘Right to 
Property’ in Part XII of the Constitution which provides that— 
“no person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of 
law”. 

(4) Tbe safeguards contained in Art. 31 relating to acquisition of 
property of an educational institution established and administered 
by a minority has now been incorporated in Art. 30 by adding a 
new clause (1-A) after clause (1). 

Elections .— The Amendment omits Art. 329- A which was inserted by the 
42nd Amendment Act and which took away the power of the courts to decide 
election disputes of the Prime Minister and the Speaker of the Lok Sabha. 
Forty-fifth Amendment Act, 1980. 

This Amendment has substituted the word “fony” for the word 
‘‘thirty” in Art. 334 of the Constitution. It has thus extended the period of 
reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Lok 
Sabba and the State Assemblies from ‘thirty’ to 'forty years’ from the 
commencement of the Constitution originally this reservation was only for 
'ten' years. 



466 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 09 INDIA 


Colourable Legislation, 337 
Collective Responsibility, 228 
Compensation 

justiciability of, 364 
Compulsory Service 

for public purpose, 168 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India. 247 
Composition 

of Lok Sabha, 234 
of Rajya Sabha, 233 
of Parliament, 233 
of Supreme Court, 248 
Compulsory Acquisition of Property, 
361 

Contempt of Court, 113 
Council of Ministers, 222 
Cripp's Mission, 15 
D 

Decency or Morality, 112 
Detenue 

right to be communicated grounds of 
detention, 168 
right of representation, 160 
Defamation, 1 14 
Directive 

for development of Hindi, 406 
Directive Principles, 194 

and fundamental rights, 198 
Distribution of Legislative Power under 
the Government India Act, 1935, 
13 

under the present Constitution, 323 
Discrimination 

of grounds of religion, race, etc,, 85 
Dismissal 

of the Ministers, 230 
Dissolution 

of the Legislative Assembly, 267 
of Lok Sabha, 227 
Distinction 

between Money Bill, Financial Bill 
and other Bills, 244 
Disputes 

relating to Presidential election, 209 
relating to water, 344 i 


Disqualifications 

for membership of Parliament, 236 
Double Jeopardy 

protection agamst, 136 
Doctrine of pleasure, 380 
lesttfcticm* -on, 3%Y 
Duty 

of the Union to protect States, 421 
E 


Eclipse 

doctrine of, 62 
Effects 

of proclamation of emergency, 413 
of dissolution on the business 
pending in the House, 241 

Election Commission, 394 
Election Laws 

power of Parliament and State 
Legislature with regard to, 395 
Emergency 

caused by war or aimed rebellion, 
408 

effect of proclamation of, 413 
Eminent domain 
definition of, 360 

Employment of children in factories, 
168 

Enforcement 

of fundamental rights, 257 
Equality before law, 68 
Equality of opportunity in public 
employment, 92 
Ex post facto law 

protection against, 131 
Exceptional grant, 246 
Exploitation 

right against, 167 
Extent 

of Supreme Court power under 
Art. 32, 189 

Ertention 

of writ jurisdiction of High Court, 



INDEX 


469 


Prime Minister 

appointment of, 223 
constitutional duties, 229 
advice of the caretaker, 226 
Principles 

of interpretation of Lists, 355 
Privileges 

of Legislature, 315 

effect o f 44th Amendment Act, 317 

court and the, 320 

Procedure _ . 

for impeachment of the President, 
211 

Proclamation of Emergency 
effect of, 406 

Profession, Occupation Trade or 
Business 
freedom of, 122 
Protection 

against double jeopardy, 132 
agaiDSt ex post facto law, 131 
- against self-incrimination, 134 
of life and personal liberty, 138 

Prohibition . , 

of traffic in human being ana 
forced labour, 167 
Preventive Detention 
meaning of, 154 - 
necessity of, 155 

constitutional safeguard against, 
156 

public Employment 

equality of opportunity m matters 

or, 92 , , ‘ ‘ ^ 

Public Purpose 

compulsory service for, 168 


QualiOcation 

of Supreme Court Judges, 252 
of High Court Judges, 299 


Reasonable opportunity 

to be given to government servants, 
383 

Recruitment 

and regulation of ; conditions of 
services, 380 
Regulative Act, 1773, 3 
Regulation 

validation of certain Acts, and, 187 
Religion 

right to freedom of, 170 
matters of, 142 

restrictions on freedom of, 172 
what is, 171 
Review 

by Advisory board, 156 
Repugnancy 

between a Central and a State law, 
338 

Res-j'udicata, 191 
Residuary Powers, 324 
Restrictions 

on the doctrine of pleasure, 381 
on State taxing power, 348 
on fundamental right of members 
of armed forces, 192 

Right 

against exploitation, 167 
of detenues to be informed of 
grounds of anest, 153 
to be defended by a lawyer of bis 
own choice, 15) 

to be produced before a magistrate, 
154 

to property, 360 
to freedom of religion, 170 
to administer property owned by 
denomination, 176 
to constitutional remedies, 188 
to equality. 67 
to freedom, 1 01 
S 


Quo-warranto 

nature of writ of, 311 


R 


Rajya Sabha, 233 
Reasonable classification, 69 


Safeguards 

againit arbitrary arrest and deten- 
tion, 152 
Savings 

of existing laws, 378 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
special provision for, 400 



468 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


Legislative Relations 

between Union and the States, 322 
Legislative Powers 
distribution of, 323 
Linguistic Minorities, 404 
Liability 

of State in contract, 3S4 
in Tort, 355 
Local Authorities 
meaning of, 51 
Lok Sabha 

composition of, <34 

M 

Maintenance of Internal Security 
Act, 1971, 163 
Mandamus— See Writs 
Minorities 

right to establish and manage 
educational institutions, 179 
Government powers to regulate 
educational institutions of, 181 
Ministers 

appointment' of, 223 
collective responsibility of, 228 
dismissal of, ?30 
individual responsibility, 229 
Money Bill 
definition, 243 
Morley-Minto Reforms, 9 
Movement 

freedom of, 120 

restrictions on right to movement, 
120 

Montague-Chelmsford Reforms, 9 
N 

Necessity 

of amending provision in the 
Constitution, 431 
No deprivation 

, of property except by authority of 
' law, 361 

O 

Official Language, 406 


Ordinance 

President's power to issue, 215 
Governor’s power to issue, 294 
law in Art. 13 includes, 65 
Original jurisdiction 

of the Supreme Court, 255 
Ordinary Bills, 241 
Other authorities 

within the territory of India, 55 

P 

Parliament, 233 

composition of, 233 
sessions of, 239 

qualifications for membership of, 
236 ’ 

disqualifications for membership of. 

Personal liberty 
meaning of, 139 
Pits India Act, 1784, 5 
Pith and substance 
doctrine of, 336 
Power 

of Government to regulate minority 
run educational institutions, 179 
of Parliament and State Letisla- 
tures with regard to election 
laws, 395 

of Parliament to legislate on State 
subjects, 340 

of Parliament to regulate trade and 
commerce in public interest, 378 
residuary, 324 
Preamble 

purpose of, 30 
amendment of, 30 
value of, 29 
Pre-censorship 
validity of, 105 
President 

position of, 2!0 
powers of, 213 
qualification of, 207 
privileges of, 212 
election of, 207 
oath by the, 211 
term of the office of the, 211 
assent to Bills by, 242 



470 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDU 


Self incrimination 

prohibition against, 134 
Sedition 

definition of, 115 
Severability 

doctrine of, 60 
Sessions 

of Parliament, 239 
of State Legislature, 290 
Services 

under the Union and the States, 380 
Social welfare and social reform, 173 
Supplementary grants, 246 
Speaker and Deputy Speaker 
of Lok Sabba, 238 
of State Assembly, 291 
powers and functions of, 291 
Special provisions 

relating to certain classes, 40o 
Special Court and Civil Procedure, 77 
State 

definition of, 54 
State Liability, 354 
State trading, 111 
Supreme Court, 254 

T 


Taxation 

only by authority of law, 346 
Territorial 

constituencies, 235 
Termination 

of service when amounts to punish- 
ment, 384 


Territory 

of the Union, 34 
name, 34 
cession of, 38 
Titles 

abolition of, 100 
Tribunals, 267 
U 

Untouchability 
abolition of, 99 

V 

Validation 

of certain acts and regulations, 380 
Vice-President, 213 
Votes 

on accounts, 246 

on credit and exceptional grants, 


W 

Waiver 

doctrine of, 64 
Women and children 

special provisions for, 87 
Writs 

nature of, 305 
territorial extent of, 303 
Habeas Corpus. 305 
Mandamus, 307 
Prohibition, 308 
Certiorari* 309 
Quo warranto, 311 



470 


CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF INDIA 


Self incrimination 

prohibition against, 134 
Sedition 

definition of, 115 
Severability 

doctrine of, 60 
Sessions 

of Parliament, 239 
of State Legislature, 290 
Services 

under the Union and the States, 380 
Social welfare and social-reform, 173 
Supplementary gtants, 246 
Speaker and Deputy Speaker 
of Lok Sabha, 238 
of State Assembly, 291 
powers and functions of, 291 
Special provisions 

relating to certain classes, 40u 
Special Court and Civil Procedure, 77 
State 

definition of, 54 
State Liability, 354 
State trading, 111 
Supreme Court, 254 

T 


Taxation 

only by authority of law, 346 

Territorial 

constituencies, 235 
Termination 

of service when amounts to punish* 
meat, 384 


Territory 

of the Union, 34 
name, 34 
cession of, 38 
Titles 

abolition of, 100 
Tribunals, 267 
U 

Untouchability 
abolition of, 99 

V 

Validation 

of certain acts and regulations, 380 
Vice-President, 213 
Votes 

on accounts, 246 

on credit and exceptional grants. 
246 


W 

Waiver 

doctrine of, 64 J 
Women and children 

special provisions for, 87 
Writs 

nature of, 305 
territorial extent of, 303 
Habeas Corpus. 305 
Mandamus, 307 
Prohibition. 308 
Certiorari, 309 
Quo warranto, 311 



